Professor Sanderson: Thank you.

Well, up to this point, I've covered the verses of the text which are addressed to the principal deities of the system. The first available reference to **Kālīsaṅkarṣaṇī**. The verses after that — the four verses that follow — uh, addressing, uh, the three core deities, which are aspects of **Kālīsaṅkarṣaṇī** in this system. **Parāpara** **paranāparā**. And then, then, um, the verse after that addressed to **Gaṇeśa**, um, or **Gaṇapati**, which, uh, as I tried to show, is a highly encoded, um, expression of a prayer for enlightenment through the expansion of I-consciousness — throwing off its limited ego and achieving full and all-embracing awareness. Um, which was a *tour de force* on his part, but unfortunately at the cost of considerable ambiguity and a lot of, um, head-scratching to try to work out exactly what he had in mind. As you remember, I ventured to differ with **Jayaratha** in his interpretation, which I think, um, the difference really focuses on the interpretation of the word **cakrireśvaratāyitam**, which occurs in a compound, which he took to mean the dative in the sense of 'behaving like'. So, obeisance to **Gaṇeśa** or **Gaṇapati** — may, may **Gaṇapati** aid me! He who, um, is the center, the lord of the wheel, who or, 'behaves like', rather, 'who behaves like the lord of the wheel'. Which is a very lame thing to say. What he should have been — what he should have seen is that it means 'obeisance to, um, **Gaṇapati**, uh, whose inner nature is to **become**, to be **transformed into**, this fully expanded I-consciousness'. Not the contracted I-consciousness, which is the starting point. And I gave you some passages from a wonderful but badly **transmitted** work called the **Mahānaya prakāśa**, um, published from Trivandrum, which explains the doctrine of the **krama**, that the I-awareness which arises in the end of any, any cognition, uh, as when you say to yourself — as a silent, mental statement — "I perceive X." That 'I' is, as it were, a **conduit** through which one can enter into fully expanded consciousness. 

Um, so now having completed his obeisance to the principal deities, he starts addressing the teachers of the tradition, um, of the **traditions**, I should say, which he sees as flowing into his system, uh, the system that he elaborates in this, this great work, **Tantrāloka**. And he begins by, uh, addressing a prayer to **Matsyendra**. Now, **Matsyendra** is the **siddha**, the perfected one, otherwise known as **Matsyendranātha**, or, uh, **Mīnanātha**. The meaning of **Matsyendra** is essentially 'the fisherman'. Now, which is like saying 'the untouchable', because the fishermen were considered untouchable in, in traditional Indian society. Um, and to have as the **revealer** of your scriptural *corpus* a fisherman is really one in the eye for Brahmanical orthodoxy, so to speak. It was saying that this system transcends Brahmanical concerns with the pure and the impure, the upper caste and the lower caste, uh, by erecting into a position of preeminence, uh, a person who is no more or less an **antyaja** — one of the lowest born, uh, outside the four main caste categories. Um, someone at the end, at the bottom of the pile, um, one who doesn't, for example, benefit from cremation rites. Uh, **antyajas** are generally buried rather than cremated. Um, contact with them was considered highly polluting. They were supposed to live outside the settlements of the caste communities and to come into it only to do their traditional functions, uh, such as the removal of ordure, uh, fishing, and other such activities. Um, so we begin with a prayer to this strange figure, Lord **Matsyendra**, who seems to turn Brahmanical values on their head.

And this is the **seventh verse**, uh, the opening verses of **Tantrāloka**:

> **ragārūṇaṃ granthibilāvakīrṇam yōjālamātan̄navitānavṛtti kalumbitaṃ bāhyapatē cakāra stanmē sa matsyendravību prasannaḥ**

So here we have an optative again. **stanmē sa matsyendravību prasannaḥ**. Literally, "May that Lord **Matsyendra** be favorable to me." **stanmē sa matsyendravību prasannaḥ**, or as I've translated here: "May the famed Lord **Matsyendra** favor me in my, in my endeavor. I pray that he will favor me in my endeavor." That's the idea. And then the rest of the verse has two meanings. One referring, puzzlingly for anyone restricted to the Kashmiri in literature, to his act as a fisherman, of drawing of a net to land, and the other to, uh, esoteric or, as, or metaphysical matters. There are two levels of meaning here: one mythological and the other metaphysical. So, I've distinguished these two meanings by putting them within angle brackets. Um, and the one I give first, um, is the literal meaning referring to the net. So, "I pray that the famed Lord **Matsyendra** will favor me in my endeavor. He who brought to land" — **bāhyapatē cakāra** is "who placed on the path outside." — "I brought to land, uh, outside the water, his fishing net, **jālam**, which is **rāgārūṇam**, red with ruddle or pigment. **kalumbitam** artfully strong. **kalāyā umbitam**. **umbitam** in the meaning of **grumpitam**, one of its meanings. So, 'artfully strong' or 'skillfully strong', **ātannavitānavṛtti**, which extends wide and long in both directions. This is rather a banal thing to say about a net, but when you see something like that, we know that you're looking for a second meaning. Uh, if there's a slight awkwardness in the formulation, it's usually because the author is trying to — there's another meaning underneath, which works more smoothly for that particular selection of syllables. Um, we saw that, for example, in the first verse as well. It was a slight awkwardness of certain phrases which stimulates one to look for a second meaning. Um, so it's long and wide, **ātannavitānavṛtti**, um, and "full of knots and apertures." Well, nets are. Again, we seem to be in the realm of the banal here. Um, **granthibilāvakīrṇam**. 

And now we have the second meaning. And you'll see that in my translation, I've written "who thereby," now beginning to give the second meaning, and then put in square brackets the word 'thereby', indicating that the, the **connection** between the two meanings is that the first, the bringing the net to land, explains the second, and we'll, we'll see what this is in due course. "Who thereby banished" — **bāhyapatē cakāra**, "pushed to the outside." — "who thereby banished by bringing this net to land the ensnaring net, the **jālam**, of **māyā**, of differentiated existence. That is **rāgārūṇam**, that glows red with attachment." **rāga** is an ontological category for the Shaivas. It is that by virtue of which souls wish to be immersed in sense experience. It's a generic attachment, uh, to, to sense experience. Um, so it, it glows red with attachment to the objects of the senses, is **kalumbitam** — here in the meaning **permeated**. **umbitam** here in the sense of permeated, by contracted agency. **kalā** as another onto- ontological, or ontic category, for the Shaivas. And it is explained — and just let that go by. Um, it is, um — it is the function by virtue of — we could define it as a limited power of action. It's the first product of the category **māyā** by virtue of which souls are able to enact in the limited — act in a limited universe, or contracted universe. So, it's **permeated by contracted agency**, and it's **ātannavitānavṛtti**. It functions — it's functioning, it's **vṛtti**, is throughout the length and breadth of the universe — under standard of the universe. So, it's all-pervasive. So, this **kalā** pervades the entire universe. It's the category which subsumes all other emanations that make up the differentiated universe. Um, for the **Sāiddhāntikas**, it's a material, unconscious entity, which only differentiates itself under the stimulus of **Shiva's** will. For the **Shakta Shaivas** however, is simply an aspect of the dynamism of consciousness. Consciousness has this ability to limit itself, to *appear* to be limited by what it's not, facing it from the outside. Yeah. So, if you think I'm outside you, you're wrong. Look at me in a different way. Yeah. And it is **granthibilāvakīrṇam**. **avakīrṇam**, 'filled, pervaded,' by **granthi** **bilā**. That's it, 'the apertures of the **granthi,' literally, the knot. The **granthi** here is another ontic category. It's an aspect of **māyā**, and it was seen by the dualists particularly as a physical barrier through which the soul has to penetrate in order to achieve liberation. Of course, for **Abhinavagupta**, there are no material barriers to consciousness, but nonetheless, reality presents itself as though there were. It appears in that way, that there is this impossible barrier between the world of differentiation and the enlightened world of fully expanded consciousness, or full I-awareness, **pūrṇahantā**. 

So, okay, you, you're — your doubts are not resolved. You can't understand why dragging a net to land should lead to this abolition of the net of **māyā**, you know, the figurative net of **māyā**, and the net of differentiated perception. The way the non-dualists in this tradition define **māyā** is **bhinnavedya pratāhā**, the state of the manifestation, **pratāhā**, of **bhinnavedya**, differentiated objects of perception, differentiated from each other and from the perceiver, who likewise — when, who, who we, the perceivers, as we perceive the object, also perceive ourselves not only as other than the object, but also other than other perceivers. So, it's a world of multi-dimensional plurality. So, what is the, uh, **connection** here? Procopius collections of Śaiva material found in the Kathmandu Valley, uh, one of those works is called the *Jñāna Nirṇaya*. Published under the title *Kaula Jñāna Nirṇaya*. Um, a quite horrendously bad edition, by the way. Um, by a certain scholar called Bagchi. There's hardly a single line in the text which makes any sense as, as edited. It's a shocking job. Should have been thrown back at him by the publisher, but never mind. Uh, I've got hold of the, the only surviving manuscript and, um, I can see his task was a considerable one, because it's written in a very low register of Sanskrit. One of the things you need to know about, about scriptural literature in general, but particularly Śaiva, um, scriptural literature, especially the more shocking division of it, is that it's not written in Pāṇinian Sanskrit, exactly. It's written in a much looser register of the language. And that leads to ambiguity and also considerable levels of scribal corruption as well. Because the *paṇḍitas* copying these things are puzzled by the div — by the deviations that they encounter at every step from Pāṇinian norms. I have a tendency to try to 'correct', but often wrongly. Because scribes are working in, in a hurry and tend to be myopic. They don't step back as a scholar would and think about the context and wonder, "Now, what's gone wrong here? This doesn't quite make sense. Ah, yes, this small change restores sense, is probably correct." Hmm. So, they tend to be rather poor textual critics. So, what one hopes for is not an intelligent scribe, but a faithful scribe. One who is almost the human equivalent of a photocopying machine. Uh, but of course, human beings being what they are, we all make mistakes. I do it all the time when copying. I, I just infuriate myself with my inability to copy what I can see in front of my — in front of my eyes. I think most of us are like that.

So, the answers to be found in the *Jñāna Nirṇaya*. And, um, this work, which survives in an 11th century, uh, uh, manuscript — is your item three on page two, extending onto — the translation's on page three. Now, I think in my last lecture, uh, Professor Jacobson asked about mythology in Śaivism. And I, I said boldly that basically there isn't any. That's the general rule, at least. That the Tantrikas like to see themselves as dealing with eternal realities. The *Purāṇas* deal with stories, uh, the Tantras don't. But this is not entirely always the case. There are exceptions. And this is one of the outstanding exceptions. Especially in the literature dealing with Siddhas because Siddhas, as it were, are an intermediate category. They are, as it were, deit — deity-like, but at the same time they act in the world. So, there are often myths associated with individual Siddhas. And, **Matsyendra** is no exception to that. 

So here we have, uh, this following passage, which I've tried to get into intelligible language, in spite of the endless corruptions in the text. "When I had gone with you" — this is, this is Śiva speaking. — "When I had gone with you to Candradvīpa", which is southern area of Bengal, on the Bay of Bengal, "to impart the Kaula teachings to you in secret, our son Kārttikeya joined us, taking the form of a *Vatukā*. Concealing himself, he stole the manuscript containing this *gnosis*, this secret knowledge. I cursed him strongly as a thief, oh Devī." Then a verse has clearly been omitted, and I've reconstructed it tentatively. At least the meaning is clear. "In his anger, he threw the manuscript into the ocean." And there it was swallowed by a fish. Don't ask why, but we have to get a fisherman to get it back, is the answer. "I went to the ocean, my dear, and by searching with clairvoyant gaze, caught the fish, opened its belly, extracted the manuscript that was in it, brought it home, put it in its scripture box, and kept it hidden." Yes, recovers the manuscript, puts it in its *Jñānapuṭa* — that's the emendation — and, uh, hides it in his house. "Then, that same thief, Kārttikeya, angry again, made a breach into my dwelling by means of a tunnel, found and removed the manuscript, and hurled it once more into the ocean." Why the doubling? It doesn't seem necessary. You ha — you'd have to — to understand all these phases in the development of the narrative, you'd have to have access to a large number of variants. Um, to explain why — for what reason the narrator decided to double the process of throwing into the ocean. Anyway. So, uh, "hurled it once more into the ocean. On this occasion, it was swallowed by a *huge* fish, 10 somethings in length." Um, and now, the — the meaning is caught — the manuscript is *koṭi*, but a hundred million units of, of, of any size are going to be far too big for any fish, so I tentatively thought it might be a *daṇḍa*, which is a reasonable, uh — now, we'd make — it'd make it like a, a whale, whale-like. Be a leviathan size. So, uh, "swallowed by a huge fish. I then produced a net of power born from my anger, a *Śakti-jālam*. From within the seven oceans, I caught it in the net and started to drag it ashore." Uh, problem here. The oceans are not interconnected in, um, Hindu mythology. So, it presumably is only in one of the seven. But anyway, he drew it in from the seven oceans because there are seven in this theory of concentric cons — continents. Continents with separating oceans. "I caught it in the net and started to drag it, drag it ashore, but I couldn't bring it in because its strength was equal to mine." Equal to Śiva's! "Made more powerful by the radiance of the *gnosis* within its belly." Hmm. It could not be overcome even by the gods. The suggestion seems to be that the Śākta knowledge is *stronger* than Śiva. That, that is probably the, uh, encoded meaning here. Yeah, so, "made more powerful by the radiance of the knowledge within its belly, it could not be overcome even by the gods. So I threw off my Brāhmaṇhood." Yeah, at the moment, he's in the form of a Brahmin. Um, a caste known for its physical strength. Um, "I threw off my Brāhmaṇhood and transformed myself into a fisherman. That fisherman was myself. I turned myself into a man of that lowly caste, a *Kaivarta*. I then landed the fish that I had caught with my net of power, opened its belly again, and recovered the Kula scripture, the Kula Āgama." 

So, here's the **connection**. It's the Kul — discovery of the, the recovery of the Kula scripture, the Kula revelation, that banishes the figurative net of **māyā** by freeing us from — in providing the most effective way of freeing us from, uh, the net of **māyā**. Now, implicit there is the idea that the Kaula revelation is not only superior to the Brāhmaṇical but also implicitly to mainstream Śaiva revelation. This is, is a special, ultra-powerful form of practice within the Śaiva category, transcending the mainstream of Saiddhāntika and related forms of worship. And so on your handout, um, on the first page, under item one after verse seven, um, you see the words with which Abhinavagupta begins his treatment of the Kula system. And he distinguishes, or rather Jayaratha distinguishes, and, uh, something depend upon to put — yeah, between what he calls a 'Tantra prak — Tantra prak — Tantra prakriyā' and a 'Kula prak — Kula prakriyā'. Which can be translated approximately 'a Tantra system', *prakriyā*, and 'a Kula system'. So, he teaches the Trika as having these two levels. Um, a Kaula level, the Kula *prakriyā*, and a Tantrika level, which he calls the Tantra *prakriyā*. So, look — see what he, he says here:

> *Ataḥ samuditādhikārṇa uddiśya rahassya ucitaitatra vidhi*.

Next, in this work, I shall teach the secret rites for those who are properly qualified. That is to say, I shall explain next this entire course of worship following the Kula system, Kula *prakriyāyāḥ*. Which is secret because it is suitable only for those *gurus* and disciples who are at the highest level of spiritual attainment. Parameśvara himself has taught that the subject of this highest teaching is the mode of worship adopted in the Kaula tradition of the Siddhas, *krama pūjane*. And that might be understood — misunderstood — to mean 'in the worship of the Krama'. But the Krama here is the Siddha Krama, the 'order of Siddhas', hmm, which is, is another name here for the, the Kaula revelation. So, um, Śiva has taught this, declaring, i.e., in the following words:

> *Even if* were to persist, even if, even if one were to persist for thousands of years, one could not achieve, using any or all of the numerous *mantras* of various kinds that are taught in the Tantra systems, what a person initiated into the tradition of the Siddhas, the Siddha Krama, can achieve in a single month. 

And actually, this is not the way Abhinavagupta wants to present things. This is a kind of rhetorical, anti-Saiddhāntika rhetoric. Because the standard view propagated by Abhinavagupta and his contemporaries is that *all* Śaivism works, and *only* Śaivism works. 'Works' in the sense of bestows perfect and definitive liberation. The difference is simply *how quickly* the liberation is achieved. So, the Siddhānta achieves it for you at death — just have to take, you have to take, you have to take their word for it. Uh, whereas the other systems promise it, its attainability. Not necessarily that it *will* be attained, but the *possibility* of its being attained here and now in this life before death through the achievement of *jīvanmukti*, through direct mystical expansion of consciousness. Um, yeah. So, uh, it seems a bit rough to be — to, to say here that even if you go on for thousands of years, you're going to get nowhere with the regular *mantras* of the systems. That's against Abhinavagupta's view, which is simply *dehāpāde* *mukti*, liberation when the body falls, rather than right now in this very life. 

So, you can see here already, um, one of the crucial aspects of Abhinavagupta's perspective is that it's *inclusivist*. He doesn't want to cut off this radical system from the more conventional, mainstream forms of observance. Not only does he wish to preserve that, he also wishes to preserve some kind of congruity with, um, uh, with Brāhmaṇical observance as well. The whole thing is a multi-level system, which works on every level in its way. He doesn't want to push anything out. Whereas if we go back to the scriptural sources, we find often a much more *radical* stance being taken. Yeah. 'The rest of religion is a waste of time, only *this* meth — method works.' The danger of taking that line is that you're likely to be arrested. You need to keep — [COMPLETED] Keep quiet about this perspective. I can give you a, a, a splendid historical example of this. There was a Kāula group in Kashmir in the, um, around about the end of the 9th century, known as the Nila — Nīlāmbaravratins, the 'black blanket observance' obser — observance, the Nīlāmbaravratam. Naked couples wandered around in groups — groups of naked couples concealed from the public gaze only by black blankets wrapped — black blankets around themselves. Singing Apabhraṃśa songs — and we get an example of this in the Āgamaḍambara of Diṅnāga Bhaṭṭa, who's satirizing this situation. Um, singing songs which basically say, 'drop out and turn on'. 'Brāhmaṇical religion is a waste of time'. Uh, you know, 'stop wasting your time with the *Vedas* and all that nonsense, uh, leave the kitchen and join us.' It's obviously particularly attractive to *women*. It is, according to the au — the, the dramatist, this form of religion is seen as highly subversive and un — un — a Brāhmaṇa observing this says, "If this gets out too much, there won't be a single Brāhmaṇa woman in a kitchen anywhere. They'll all join the sect." So, the sect is suppressed. And it's not just a dramatic fantasy, we know from historical evidence that the, the ruling king of the time, Yaśaskara- varman, did suppress the sect. Uh, declared it illegal, which led to a panic among the more 'left-sided', left-directed, Bra — uh, Śaivas — that's to say, the Śākta Śaivas — who started running for the frontier. And there's a wonderful, uh, episode in the drama in which two Kāpālikas are hiding in the cremation ground, waiting for dark so they can try to slip out of the country because they fear that if the Nīlāmbar- avratins are going to be arrested, then, uh, they will be too, because they say, "Well, they're just like us. We also drink wine, have congress with untouchable women, etcetera, etcetera." 

Um, so there *is* this tradition of radical rejection of, of, of the norms. And Abhinavagupta is adopting a rather different approach, saying, "Yes, for those with the highest capacity, yes, in certain controlled environments, it is possible to transcend these regulations, consume wine, eat meat, and so forth. Um, but you shouldn't let the dog off the leash. It should everyth — everything should be kept under control." And we could say there are similar, uh — we could see a similar pattern in esoteric Buddhism in Tibet, so certain groups are actually stamped on by Imperial authorities because they seem to be getting out of control. Um, the important thing was to bring it inside monastic control, if you can. So there *may* be secret practices going on in certain lev — on — in certain contexts, but the framework is there, holding it in. Uh, so although there's a rhetoric of transcendence of all norms, nonetheless, the norms hold. You're not subverting society itself. So, Abhinavagupta is going for a point of view which will enable those who adhere to these esoteric practices to be seen nonetheless as having authority over the whole apparatus of the religion, all the way down through the Siddhānta into the Brāhmaṇical zone. He was largely successful in that effort, I think, in, in Kashmir. 

Um, and then there's another passage on page two, on item two there again from *Tantrāloka*, this 29th book, which deals with the Kulaprakriyā. Um, after having set out the regular worship according to the Kula, he then moves onto initiation. And he says:

> "After first completing the preliminary Kāula worship in this way, a *guru* may then proceed to initiate a disciple of his into this elevated tradition, provided that he is that *extremely rare* person who possesses the requisite level of aptitude." 

And the word I've translated as 'extremely rare' is *lakṣaikyā*, which means, literally, 'like one in a hundred thousand'. Um, so it means a *very* rare individual. Um, so unless you have a hundred thousand pupils, you're not likely to have any of them qualifying to be ini — to be initiated in the Kula. That's an e — uh — rhetorical exaggeration, of course. Um, so, uh, because the Kula is seen as superior to the Tantra Prakriyā, he begins by adoring, uh, by appealing to, by praying to Machaṇḍa as the **revealer** of the, uh, Kula system. Um, **revealer** of the Kula system in the current *Kali Yuga*, the age of Kali. There are, in fact, four Nāthas in this system, one for each of the *Yugas*. And Machaṇḍa is the *Yoga*, is the, um, is the **Siddha** who reveals the Kula in the present, degenerate age, which began in — what was it? 3,201 BC? According to the, uh, uh, the calculations of astronomers, uh, based not on historical data, but on astronomical considerations. 

Um, so that's why we begin with **Matsyendra**. Now, there are other sources which narrate this myth of the, um, extraction of the, uh, um, the Kula scripture from the — from the fish by, uh, Machaṇḍa, but they occur in texts of the Paścimam- nāya, which is another Kāula tradition. And *there*, they've taken over this myth, but somehow subsumed it into their own sectarian environment by saying it's *not* Machaṇḍa who drew the fish to land, it's Mitranātha, whom they have substituted as their 'super-Siddha', their presiding Siddha, that, you know, governs the tradition. 

So, Mitranātha, um, is the figure in your, uh, handout number, um, five, uh, item five on page three, near the bottom. Um, I think, yes. This is a passage taken from an unpublished work called the *Kularatnodiota*, 'the luminous — the luminosity of the jewel of the Kula'. And it's a dialogue between Ādinātha, um, and the Goddess. Ādinātha being a sort of Śiva embodiment. And Ādinātha replies:

> "In the future, a partial incarnation of Pār- vati will be born, and she will give rise to it — she will give birth to her son, the six-faced god Kārttikeya. During the course of her embodiment in this form, Mitranā- ta will teach the *Gaṇanirṇaya* to her, as his consort."

*Gaṇanirṇaya*, remember, is the text we translated earlier. 

> "Doing so in private, but he will *not* teach it to his son Kārtti- keya, who, out of his anger, will hurl the manuscript of the text into the sea."

Same story again. 

> "Where it will be swallowed by a fish. My beloved Mahāmāyā, in its belly there will arise a great **Siddha**, produced by the force of divine empowerment, who will devote himself to the study of that text." 

Suddenly, he finds himself inside the leviathan, he discovers the text there, and he starts to study it. 

> "Having realized, my beloved, by means of the supernatural power achieved through meditation, that his son had thrown the manuscript into the sea, Mitranātha, the king of Siddhas, will quickly draw that fish to land with his net of power, cut open its belly, and see within it a supremely radiant **Siddha** studying the text. After witnessing this great and unprecedented win — wonder, he will say, 'I have witnessed an astonishing miracle. Because you have been reborn from within the belly of the fish, you'll be known henceforth as **Matsyendra**, Lord of Fish. This greatness of yours will be unsurpassed. This fame that will be yours as a result of this miracle will spread throughout the world. And the spiritual lineage that will descend from you, dear child, will be known as the eastern lineage, the Pūrvām- nāya. It will be, as it were, the mirror image of the western path — the already existing", according to this text, "Paścimām- nāya. Um, and it will be adorned with all the divisions of the Ānanda and the Avadhūti.'" 

That's technical stuff; we needn't worry about it. So, *this* text belongs to the Paścimām- nāya, which actually came into existence *after* the Pūrvām- nāya. Um, the Paścimām- nāya is heavily parasitic on the scriptural *corpus* of the Trika, which I'll show you is connected with the Pūrvām- nāya presently. But of course, it's very important to be earlier than your rivals. *You're* the original revelation; *they're* a secondary development. The secondary development is being given *some* status here — it's like a mirror image of the, the Paścimā — but it's being presented as derivative, a mere *image* of the original revelation. This is the opposite of the historical truth. The Pūrva- vāmnāya is the *earlier* form of Kauli-ism. The Paścimā- nāya is an elaboration or a, uh, a subsequent, uh, form of the tradition. So, um, I can't dwell on this at great length here, but I was — I just want to point out that the, the — we have two Paścimām- nāya sources: this *Kularatno- diota* and another called the *Cincinīmatasārasa- mucchaya*, which give an account of the Pūrvāmnāya. And that account of the Pūrvāmnāya matches very closely what we see in the Ka — in the, in the Kula system of the Trika, as taught in the 29th book of *Tantrāloka*. So, um, um, I, I — uh, we have here a development of, um, four Ām- nāyas within Kauli-ism. Um, Pūrvāmnāya — you see, they're differentiated by the car — differentiated by the cardinal directions. The eastern tradition, the Uttarāmnāya, the northern tradition — Āmnāya meaning 'tradition' here, synonym *Anvaya*. So, Pūrvānvāya, Uttarānvāya, um, Paścimā — sorry. I'm hopeless at writing on boards. Okay. Paścimāmnāya, and finally Dakṣiṇāmnāya, the southern transmission. Now, only the *Cincinīmata* gives an account of all four. The Pūrvāmnāya account of the Siddhas, matches very closely what we find in *Tantrāloka*. The Uttarāmnāya is, uh, is the system, um, which is, uh, approximately identical with the Krama, which inherits the Siddha Krama of the Pūrvām- nāya. The same Siddhas are venerated in their worship, but actually has a very *different* character. *This* system, the Pūrvāmnāya, um, reacts *against* the Kāpālika background of — of all these rather extreme forms of Śākta worship. And insists that it's only by *concealing* your sectarian identity that you can achieve enlightenment in this system.

> *Adṛṣṭaliṅgināṃ dṛṣṭvā saṃbhā- śati māricyā*.

The rays of consciousness converge and enlighten you only when they see that you're without visible signs of sectarian affiliation. You have to be *concealed*. And i — idea also found in the Paśupata tradition: the invisible saint who attracts abuse from the public, but is actually pure and untainted by desire, and so forth. Um, whereas the Ka — the Uttarāmnāya has *absorbed* this Kula, uh, tradition from the Pūrva- vāmnāya, um, but still adheres very strongly to Kāpālika observance. You know, we have a, uh, a lineage text from Kashmir of the masters of this tradition, historical lineage text, in which several of them are said to be *Mahāvratta- dhāra*, observing the Kāpālikan *Mahāvratā*. Including some women, by the way. It's rather unique in that regard, that it has female *gurus* as well. 

Um, so [COMPLETED] what we see here is a, uh, uh, a 'cooler' system — an *early* 'cooler' system — which has been adopted and taken up by various sectarian groups who have their own distinctive deities and — manuscript, which contains only the first seven chapters now — all the rest of it's been lost. No, I think they've only *copied* the first seven; that seems more reasonable, because they form a unit after that it begins to get very technical, um, and the technicalities pertain to ritual rather than to *gnosis* or yoga, so once you've got past *gnosis* and yoga, never mind about the rest, we'll just go on with Tripurasundarī worship, or whatever we're doing, or switch onto Bhairava worship. So, that's an interesting situation. One should not be fooled by the existence of a text like the *Tantrāloka* into thinking *everyone* was a worshiper of the Trika. It seems to be a very *minor*, uh, cult. There is, in fact, a sept of Brahmins among the Kashmirian Brahmins, uh, who have the family name 'Tiku' — you may have encountered it; there's a very wealthy shipping, shipping magnate called Tiku — um, in Sanskrit, they're known as the *Trika jātiyā*, 'those who belong to the Trika sept', or *jāti*, and you might *expect* them to keep going the Trika worship. *No*. They're worshipers of Tripurasundarī, which *has* connections with the Trika, but is *not* the same. 

Okay, so much for that. Um, yeah. Now I pointed out that there's a strong **connection**, in *my* view, between the Puravamnaya and the Trika. But it's not *exactly* the case, um, that there's *identity* between the Puravamnaya, as recorded in the *Kula ratna dyota* and the Pi — *Picchila nīla mata* on the one hand, and *Tantrāloka* on the other. So, you — one asks oneself, or *I* ask myself, at least, 'Is the Puravamnaya simply the Kula system of the Trika under another name', as those references in the ritual manuals seem to imply? *I*, I think it *isn't*. Uh, for while Abhinavagupta's account of the Kula system — Siddha pantheon — is very *close* to that of the Puravamnaya found in those Paścimamnaya sources, the material that is common to the three — the three sources that I've, uh, looked at — does not include *all* the signatures of the Trika, as we know it from Abhinavagupta's work. We lack the three Goddesses: Parā, Parāparā, and Aparā, for example. Uh, so there are a number of deficiencies there. You, you — if you expect to find the *full* pantheon of the Trika inside the Puravamnaya, you will be disappointed. It's clearly the sub — straight, but not the whole — the whole show. 

So, how do we explain this disjunction? Well, through history, I suppose, and change and development. Um, the most plausible explanation of this disjunction is the hypothesis that the Kula associated with the Siddhamacanda was originally an *independent* tradition, and that at some point, a current within the Trika — and there were *several* — adopted a variant of that tradition, *close* to that which we have seen in the Puravamnaya, as outlined in the sources of the Paścimamnaya. And in doing so, began to *assimilate* it by inserting its *own* distinctive system of *mantra* deities into this framework. So, this is expressed in the *maṇḍala* which is taught for the Kula worship in the *Tantrāloka*. One has to worship the Siddhas, their consorts, and their offspring along the four sides of an enclosing square, and then these distinctive tan — uh, deities of the Trika are then installed within that matrix — added to it. You can read that on the handout in more detail. Um, so it seems to me that the process of this assimilation of the Puravamnaya — that culminated in the *Tantrāloka* — that *in this process*, the Kula system underwent a profound *change*, or rather *developed more subtle forms* that were added to, and probably rubbed shoulders with, their less sophisticated, less intellectualized antecedents. 

The evidence of the Puravamnaya, from sources other than the *Tantrāloka* and the ritual manuals of Kashmir, which certainly postdate the *Tantrāloka*, uh, create an impression of lineages of *itinerant, non-celebate, antinomian* yogins *outside* the Brahmanical social order, wandering from one sacred Śākta site to another, in search of revelatory encounters with yoginīs. This is far from the sedentary and learned world in which Abhinavagupta was operating. I don't see him as a *antinomian* ascetic, wandering from Devīkota and, you know, such places — yeah. Indeed, if we wish to imagine how such a tradition might have looked *before* its absorption and elevation, we should look to the non-Brahmin, semi-itinerant yogins of the *still living* Nāth Sampradāya, which although it has moved *away* from its Kaula antecedent in some respects, nonetheless *preserves* much of its character. Just about — little footnote here about the **connection** between the Nāth Sampradāya and Kauliśm: if you want iconography of **Matsyendra**, look to the Nāth Sampradāya. They introduced **Matsyendra** as the *guru* of Gorakṣanāth, and he's represented sitting on a fish. And there are many representations of him in Karnāṭaka. The cult became really *big* in the 12th and 13th centuries. There are many caves that were originally Buddhist are taken over by the Nāthas, and they've, they've sculptured on the walls of these, uh, cave dwellings, images of **Matsyendra**, etc., sitting on the fish. Sometimes, the fish is also *swallowing* a little human being, which is clearly again **Matsyendra**. So, the mythology is alive and well, and they are in fact worshipers of Kubjikā and Tripurasundarī. So, they may not — who knows — but they may not be doing the *full* Kaula worship anymore, but their *mantras*, their, their, their pantheon, and much of their itinerant practice is very strongly redolent of this Kaula form. Their initiation names also, in the, uh, the Kula system of the Puravamnaya and the Uttarāmnaya, males have names ending in '-nātha', and females, names ending in '-ī'. This is also the case — this is — this is a commonality between these early Kaula systems and the Nāths. There's a lot in common there. Yeah. 

So, um, so of course, Abhinavagupta's Kauliśm presents a much more *aristocratic* face — a very different — a different face. It looks to the older tradition of Śātrastheticism and understands its nature. He's not under-informed. He, he *knows* what the texts are saying, but his Kauliśm is engaged in *rationalizing* all that — it weighs — that invite the transcendences of the externals that defined and sustained the original tradition. This, by the way, was by *no means* the work of Abhinavagupta and his near contemporaries alone. He's at the *end* of a process. The move away from visionary yoga and itinerant asceticism is already evident within the Trika's scripture, *Viravali*. There's a work which actually doesn't survive independently, but is much quoted, called the *Vīrāvalī*, 'Garland of heroes'. *Vīrāvalī* actually name for a certain order of the alphabet, I think. Um, the *Vīrāvalī*, which already shows, in a rather strong form, the idea that 'yes, there is — out there is all that outer stuff which we call the Kula, but there's *also* the Kaula — the *essence* of the Kula'. The word 'Kaula' is now used in, uh, uh — 

> *Kulebhavāṃ ābhyantarātmā kaulaṃ*

 — 'Kaula is that *within* the Kula', which transcends the Kula, which is *beyond* the Kula, which is transcendent. 

So, this esoteric movement *within* the Kaula ascetic, antinomian tradition, uh, pushed away externals, made the carrying of the *khaṭvāṅga* and the skull bowl *illegal*, as it were. Forbade it — forbade it — and emphasized, um, *transcendence* of rituals. So, in initiation, for example, um, the *Vīrāvalī*, uh, propagates a system of *direct* transmission, or *mystical* transmission, from *guru* to disciple — for highly competent, or, um, suggestible, or *advanced*, uh, disciples, uh, rather than an elaborate, ritual procedure involving fire and offerings. Direct transmission, in which the *guru* merges his sense organs, he says, with that of the disciple, so they become one, fused entity, and as a result of that, the, the, the, the initiate, um, *feels* that he has been somehow internally transformed, um. So, that what Abhinavagupta is doing is not, um, entirely original. He's simply giving it a much more *thorough*, um, theoretical, philosophical, metaphysical foundation. Um, as it were, um, making all this intelligible to, uh, learned, uh, Śaiva Brahmins, who have *no intention* of wandering around India from sacred *pīṭha* to sacred *pīṭha*, uh, but wish to internalize this and bring it from the cremation ground into the sitting room, or if you like, the bedroom. 

Now, this trend was, um, fortified by the development in 10th-century Kashmir of a tradition of *rational argument*, by Abhinavagupta's predecessors, Somananda and Utpaladeva. Utpaladeva flourished approximately 925 to 975, and Somananda approximately 25 years earlier. We have no objective data for their dates. And this philosophical development — this tradition of rational argument defending Śaiva non-dualism — introduced a degree of intellectual refinement *in service of enlightenment*, that pervades and transforms Abhinavagupta's treatment of all aspects of the Trika that he will present in this — applications. What difference does it make to your *perception*? Abhinavagupta's view is an idea of *dynamic* non-dualism of consciousness. But it's supposed to *transform* the way you experience the world, and it's *that* transformation which is enlightenment. So, it's an — it's a rationalization that *also* includes a rational account of how one could be enlightened *without* having to in — engage in a lifelong in — get, um, uh, commitment to ritual and other such things. 

So, here is verse eight, in which he addresses these — this philosophical tradition of the *gurus* of this philosophical tradition. And that's at the top of page nine, second line, verse eight:

> **त्रियम्बकाभिहितसन्ततिताम्रपर्णी** **सन्‍नोत्तिका प्रकरका न्ति विशेषव्राजः** **पूर्व्वे जयन्ति गुरवो गुरुशास्त्रसिन्धु** **कल्‍लोललीलिकलिलामलकर्णधारः**

***jaya**nti*. Now, um, ***jaya**nti* — if you're looking in, um, virtually *every* translation of Sanskrit ***namaska**ra* verses, um, you will — I see this translated as 'they conquer'. *No*, it doesn't mean that. Uh, ***ji*** *can* mean 'to conquer', but it also means 'to be supreme'. Not 'to conquer' — doesn't have an object. So, the way commentators gloss ***jaya**nti* is ***sarvotkarṣeṇa bhavanti***, or ***bhavante***. 'They are beyond everyone else.' 'Supreme are' would be the correct translation of ***jaya**nti*, *not* 'victorious is'. What does it mean, 'victorious is Shiva'? Um, it introduces a martial element, which is not intended. It just means 'greater than all others is the deity of your adoration'. So, "supreme are the *gurus*" — in this case, it's the *gurus* of the **Triyambaka** lineage — "**Triyambaka abhihita** **sa**ntiti" — the lineage, **sa**ntiti, which is called **abhihita Triyambaka**, the lineage of **Triyambaka** — "who, the those untainted helmsman" — "**karṇadhāra**" — "who have navigated before me through the surging waves of the ocean of the teachings of the master." The master is **Śrīkaṇṭha**, the **Rudra**, who is the manifestation of Shiva responsible for spreading the Shaiva teachings. He is to be found on Mount **Kailāsa**, according to Shaiva mythology. "I liken their line to the **Tāmraparṇī** river, and those *gurus* to its finest pearls, so great is their luster."

You need to — to appreciate this verse, you need to know a number of things. Uh, one of them is *where* the **Tāmraparṇī** river *is*. The **Tāmraparṇī** river rises in the far south of the subcontinent, in the **Agastyakuṭa**m peak, in the Western Ghats. Flows through South India and comes out into the Gulf of Manaar, looking at Ceylon. And at the mouth of the Manaar, uh, of the river, uh, in the Gulf of Manaar, are famous oyster beds, which have been the main source of pearls throughout the world, until the development of artificially cultivated pearls. And you also need to know that pearls were a *fantastic* value. I mean, they were extraordinarily expensive. I forget — I *have* some data somewhere in my commentary, but we have from the Roman world, um, evidence that, um, uh, pawning *one* pearl was sufficient to fund an entire war! They were *really* very valuable, indeed. And they may have been a bit cheaper in India itself, possibly. Um, especially for you — a special price. But if they could sell them for six million **sa**stershi to Romans, why would they sell them any less to anyone else? Um, "Yes, you are my brother, I'll give you a special price." Yeah, we've all heard that one. Anyway, they were fantastically valuable. So, to compare these *gurus* to pearls is to *really* stress, uh, enormous appreciation of their, of their worth. Um, the, uh — I won't go into the physiology, as understood, of the generation of pearls, but it's basically the idea that the sea — the river water from **Tāmraparṇī** mingles, goes into the ocean where the — where the oysters are, and enter into the oysters and *fertilize* them. And from *that*, the pearls grow. Um, many accounts of these oyster beds, including in Marco Polo's travels, where it's explained that — and some Greek sources as well, where it's explained that the, the, the pearls are gathered by condemned criminals, because the place is absolutely *seething* with sharks. So, you couldn't get ordinary people to go in there. And they had *mantra* specialists, whose job it was to keep the sharks at bay while these unfortunates were gathering the pearls. Anyway, that's, that's what the texts say. Whether it is *true* or not, *I* can't say. Um, if you go online and look up 'sharks', there's *plenty* of information there. And there seem — it seems to fall into two camps. The one is, 'Sharks, no problem at all. It's totally exaggerated. They're friendly, lovable creatures.' And the *other* kind is *endless* accounts of shark attacks. They, there — there's a very ambiguous view of sharks at the moment, I'm afraid. I cling to this — to the second view. *I* would be hesitant to jump into the Gulf of Manaar and, uh, at present, at least. 

So, here, um, he is, uh, addressing, uh, the *gurus* of the **Triyambaka** lineage, as it's called. And, um, in the next passage that you have there on your handout, beginning on page nine, the lower part of the text, and going on, um, for some time, is a critical edition I prepared of a rather strange passage, which most people have discovered only at the end. Most people know only because it forms the end of the *Śivadṛṣṭi* of **Somānanda**, in which **Somā**nanda is giving an account of his *own* lineage. In other words, the lineage of the **Triyambaka**s — those who follow **Triyambaka**. And I won't read it to you now, but if you *are* interested, you can read that. You can see how *badly transmitted* it is by the very *large* apparatus criticus underneath the Sanskrit text that I've printed there. Um, hardly anything passes without, without comment. It's, uh, quite tricky. Uh, and *exactly who wrote this*, and *when it first came into circulation*, I'm not sure. *I* think it probably wasn't **Somā**nanda, but, um, it's *possible* it was. Or he wrote a version of it which has circulated and been elaborated at different times, um. 

Okay. And that lineage begins with mythical, uh, mythical sages — mythical **ṛṣi**s — who generate their offspring through the *mind*. We have, uh, generations of **Mānasaputra**s — mentally created sons. Um, goes through several generations, um, and then, um, if you look towards the *end* of that passage, of the translation, on page 11, we see, um — one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten. So, ten — four — uh, maybe eight lines down:

> "His son achieved success in the same way. This continued through 14 **siddha**s, all of whom were created by producing sons in this manner. One day, the 15th such son, who was well-versed in all the **śāstra**s, through carnal desire and on his own initiative, approached a certain Brahmin and obtained from him his Brahmin daughter in marriage."

So, the *first* of the marriages is the 15th — the *15th*, I think. 

> "He fathered a worthy son. In the course of his wanderings, that son came in time to Kashmir and settled there. His name was **Saṅgrama**ditya. His son was **Varṣā**ditya. He fathered the venerable **Arunā**ditya. **Arunā**ditya fathered a worthy son called **Āna**nda — "

"I saw **Somā**nanda", and the latter's worthy son, "and have composed this treatise called *Śivadṛṣṭi*. Thus I've explained this lineage which bears the name **Triyambaka** — and in the vernacular, **Teramba** — which is now spread far and wide through the disciples of these *gurus* and the disciples of those — " 

So, um, yeah, after that I've given a passage from a South Indian source, which *includes* that passage, but then adds some further generations, down to **Kṣema**rāja. Um, so the tradition was maintained. So, Abhinavagupta sees himself as in a lineage which begins in the distant past, on Mount **Kailāsa**, where a command is given to a certain **siddha**, because the traditional was dying out: 'Now regenerate, revivify this tradition!' And this is the *end* of that long process. So, just as the **Tāmraparṇī** produces its wonderful pearls only at the *end* of its course, when it reaches the ocean, so likewise — I suspect *this* is the idea — um, this long line of *gurus*, which begins with **Durvāsa**s on Mount **Kailāsa**, being addressed by Shiva, who tells **Śrīkaṇṭha** — tells him, "Now come on, revivify this tradition!" So, so likewise, *that* gives birth to these wonderful works of philosophical reasoning only at the very *end* of this long process of several — about 20 generations — down to the time of **Somā**nanda. And it's important that is represented as *extra*-Kashmiri. It comes into Kashmir only *later* in its course. So, it's important — it's always been important to the Kashmiris, while, uh, exalting the glories of their, of their, of their, their, their, their nation, not to be seen as cut off from the pan-Brahmanical, um, shared 'ecosphere', as it were. Always to be seen as part of *greater* India. And, uh, grounds for doing so are rather *slender*, for the early period. A couple of references in the *Mahābhārata*, which were probably interpolated, uh, which talk about Kashmir as being a great center of theaters and, and so forth. In the *early* centuries, Kashmir was a *Buddhist* place. So, *I* think it's only from the 4th century onwards that Brahmanism begins to show itself. It *may* have been there earlier, but it doesn't show itself until we get to the 4th and 5th centuries.

Um, now of course, *I* had ambitions to cover a lot *more* than I've done today, as you can see from this *vast* handout, um, but we'll return to the — um, we'll return to this *next* week — not next week — *two* weeks from now, in the fourth lecture. Uh, where the emphasis will be on, uh, his teacher, **Bhūti**rāja, but, um, who was a **krama** master. But *that* must be postponed, I think, um, until the next lecture, since we are now at 3:14. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you.
