So, I think I should take my hat off to my teacher, which I didn't do last time. I just want to let everyone know that um, although I've been working on this subject independently for a great many years now, I suppose since my early 20s until I'm — I'm now 73, um, but it began with six years studying with my — with my teacher Lakṣmaṇ Joo in Kashmir. Swami Lakṣmaṇ Joo. And uh, I don't think I would have been able to develop the deep enthusiasm which has driven this research throughout my life, had it not been for his example and the teaching that he uh so freely gave me when I was a young man. 

So, here I'm being very traditional. I'm doing a _pranāma_, as it were, to my — to my teacher um, that I think is necessary to say. 

Um, so in the first lecture, I covered only the first verse. And I — I tried to show you that this verse, in a rather encoded way, in a rather veiled manner, was uh an _āśīrvāda_, a **benediction** addressed to the goddess Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, that lies at the very heart of Abhinavagupta's Śaivism. Of course, the immediate response from many people would be, "Ah, but is — is he not a Śaiva? Surely, he puts Śiva as the highest reality." Well, he does. But the **essence** of Śiva is the **goddess**. And the **goddess** is that **point** in his nature which Abhinavagupta, which excuse me, which Śiva himself cannot **objectivate**. He can't get behind that and above it to see it from above, as it were. It is his immediate reality. And so, this is the um, primary **object of meditation** and contemplation in his uh, vision of Śaivism. So, if you like, he's a crypto-Śākta, he's a person whose emotion, if you like, is — religious emotion is directed towards the goddess rather than Śiva, who's a, in a sense, a philosophical abstraction, whose dynamic **nature** is the **object of contemplation**, namely, the **goddess**. 

Now, in the first verse, he addressed Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī um, in this veiled manner. And I explained to you that uh Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī is **seen** by him as the **state** of the **fusion** of the three **primary goddesses** of the Trika uh, whose names are, unimaginatively, Parāparā, Parā, and Aparā: superior, intermediate, and lower. And it's these three goddesses that are about to be addressed in the next three verses. And these three uh, unexceptionally named goddesses, labeled rather than named you might say, um, are equated with a number of fundamental **triads** in his thinking. And the word for triad in — in Sanskrit, one of the words is a *trikam*, which uh, is one of the reasons why the system is known as the **Trika** system: "of the triad." 

And this — these uh, triads — I've indicated these, some of them up there. Uh the first one um, *jñānaṃ*, *icchā*, and *kriyā*. Now, *icchā* I trans — I translated as precognitive **impulse**. And I think someone commenting on — online on my lecture asked what on earth I meant by that, because the word *icchā*, of course, means **will**. But, **will**, in the conventional understanding of that term, presupposes cognition. You have to **know** in — in order to **want**. You need a pot — you have to know what a pot is and what it can do for you. So, in that sense, in the Naiyāyika sense of it, *icchā*, *icchā* presupposes *jñāna*. 

But, here, *jñāna* presupposes *icchā*. It's a prediscursive upsurge of **consciousness** towards cognition and **action**. It's that which underlies that. So, *icchā* here, although it — although it means will, is being used in a very special sense. That's something precognitive, before the arising of structured **cognition**. Like, creative sur — upsurge. So, that's what *icchā* means. And, the other two, the immediate is *jñānaṃ*, **cognition**, and the lower is *kriyā*, **action**. Now, yes, in this perspective, *kriyā* is lower, but there's another perspective in Śaivism, dictated by the **Krama** approach, the Kāli uh, devotion approach, which sees *kriyā* as the fullest **expansion of consciousness**. It's the lowest, but it's also that in which consciousness reaches its full — fullest articulation as the manifest world. So, maintaining **awareness** of the unity of the whole process in its most outer aspect is considered the true state of **enlightenment**. The opposite is to be uh, immersed in an inner state, and that's seen as easy. To be fully conscious, fully aware of your inner nature in the midst of action is seen as the most advanced form of **non-duality**. So, there are two competing perspectives here. And these are constantly being played against each other in — in his work. 

And, the — the second perspective, the one in which you're rising from above to below, as it were, is really that coming from the tradition of the **Krama**, the tra — the tradition of devotion to Kāli, which is articulated in — in Kashmir uh, beginning in the um, the 9th century and passing into the works of Abhinavagupta. It seems that he was first trained in that tradition, and then later encountered the Trika uh, and started reading, seeing the Trika with a strong Krama agenda. And, that is why we keep seeing these — we keep coming back to the Krama, he's constantly reading it in. And we'll see that this — this week, when we come to the verse of benediction to Gaṇeśa. But, we see it here as well through the verse on the color devoted to Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī.

So, the other uh triads um, are *pramāṇaṃ*, *pramātā*, and *prameyam*, or if you prefer um, indelo- logical abstractions, *pramātrī*. Um, I prefer not to um, use words that don't exist in the language. *Pramāṇaṃ*, *pramātā*, and *prameyam*. To use the nominative singular. *Pramātā* is the **agent** of **cognition**, *pramāṇaṃ* is the **means of cognition**. Not used in the sense of "valid means of cognition," as in epistemology, but simply, "that by which one knows." So, the senses, the mind, and so forth. So, there's **consciousness** as the **agent** of **cognition**, there are the **means** of **cognition**, and there is *prameyam*, the **object** of cognition. Um, and these correlate in the same way with Parāparā, Parā, and Aparā. 

And then, finally, *śakti*, *śiva*, and *nara*. Now, *śakti* and *śiva* will be intelligible to everyone: *śiva* and his innate **power**. And uh, uh *nara* means the **individual soul**. It's a technical term of the **Trika**. And, it seems that in its earliest phase, this particular triad was the basic one. This idea that reality consists of these three modalities — *śiva*, *śakti*, and individual souls — which do not exist eternally as separate from *śiva* in the way that they do in the Siddhānta. They're simply modalities of *consciousness'* appearance in the world. It contracts itself as a plurality of centers of awareness. So, that's the la-, as it were, historically the earliest philosophical stratum, if you like. And, this one above it, *pramāṇaṃ*, *pramātā*, and *prameyam*, is the result of a kind of Copernican **revolution**, in which these triads have been read into the structure of cognition itself. So, the- so this is really the — the **novel** one. And, I think it's associated with the work of Utpaladeva, the founder of the Pratyabhijñā tradition. So, this rewriting of everything in terms of the inner structure of cognition is the real **revolution** that's going on in Kashmir in this 10th-century period — period of the 10th century. 

Uh, the others, *icchā*, *jñāna*, and *kriyā*, these are ancient in the Śaiva tradition. You can see them in early texts, even pre-Tantric texts. And *śiva*, *śakti*, and *nara*, well, the term *nara* is a nov — is a novelty. Um, but, the idea of *śiva*, *śakti*, and *anu*, another term for the individual soul, is something pervasive in Śaivism. The difference is that in the dualistic systems, the souls, individual souls, are eternal and will never be um — um, merged into anything else. They can be omniscient and omnipotent, but they will never become merged into *śiva*. *Śiva*'s just another soul. The only difference is that he has always been liberated, has never been bound, where they are bound and *can* be liberated. So, we become *śivas*, according to the dua — the Siddhāntika perspective, but we're not *anādi śivas*. We're not — we're not *śivas* who have always been *śiva*, as it were, because we were unaware of our — our nature. 

So, let me plunge into the verses. I'm going to read the three verses. 

*Naumi citpratibhāṃ bhairavīṃ parāṃ bhairavayogiṇīm mātr̥mānaprameyāṃśaśūlaṃbujakṛtāspadām.* 

*Naumi devīṃ śarīrastaṃ nṛ̥tyato bhairavākr̥tehi prāvṛṇmeghaghanavyomāṃ vijjullekhāvilāsinīm.* 

*Dīptajyotiścatāpluṣṭa bhedabandha trayam sphurat tajjñānaśūlaṃ satpakṣa vipakṣo kartanakṣamam.* 

*Naumi citpratibhāṃ.* I do homage to the *citpratibhā*, the *pratibhā* of consciousness. *Pratibhā* here means something like "creativity," the dynamic creativity of consciousness. This is not a passive Absolute onto which we superimpose duality. It superimposes duality onto itself, without falling from its nature. So, I offer praise. *Naumi*, from *nu*, "to praise." I o- praise, or homage. I offer my homage to the cre — creativity of consciousness, which is innate in Bhairava. Literally, "which is conjoined with Bhairava." *Bhairavayogiṇīm*, with the implication of a second meaning, which is the *yogiṇī*, the consort of Bhairava. *Bhairava yogiṇīm*, who is inseparable from Bhairava. Without whom Bhairava has no real — no reality. Since she is indeed the life, this is indeed the life of — of Bhairava. So, I offer my homage to the creative creativity of consciousness, which is the very life of Bhaira- — Bhairava, which is innate, inseparable from Bhairava. *Parāḥ*, the goddess Parā, or simply "the Supreme Goddess." It's clearly ambiguous, *intended* to be ambiguous. The Goddess Parā, *mātr̥mānaprameyāṃśaśūlaṃbujakṛtāspadām*, who has taken up her position, *kṛtāspadām*, who is located on the *ambuja*, the lotuses, understand plural, upon the *śūla*, upon the trident. And *śūla*, here, is synonymous with *triśūla*, whose parts, *aṃśa*, whose prongs, whose cusps, the three — the three are *mātrī*, *māna*, and *prameya*. *Mātr̥* — *Mātrī* and *māna* are uh, abbreviated for *pramātrī* and *pramāṇa*. That's to say, the agent, means, and objects of cognition. So, here we introduce, straight away, this new triad. New in the sense propagated by his immediate predecessors. You won't find it in the scriptural texts, it only occurs in the exegesis. 

And, it makes a big difference of course. So, you will see, on the end of your handout, I finally uh, gave some thought to it and realized it was perfectly simple. There was getting this diagram from my — from m — my word to you. Um, on the back page, you'll see the schematic outline of this maṇḍala of the Trika, the Triśūla Urdhva Amnāya, the maṇḍala of the trident and three lotuses. Um, and this was published by me in 1986, after an unconscionable period of time trying to decode the description of this in the — in the Mattavilāsa, but finally it worked! I *knew* it was right. And all the lines met in the right place. Um, I used graph paper and compasses, and eventually worked out. Um, and it was published in an article on the um, the maṇḍalas, the maṇḍala of the Trika. And um, I have a copy of that of course in my computer, but it's a rather poor copy, and this is a reproduction of my drawing, which came out in Yearley's translation of the Tantarloka — with due acknowledgment. Uh, and his is much more uh, give you a much clearer image, so he, here it is. So, you see there the trident, on the top of the trident with its three prongs and a lotus on the tip of each, on the cusp of each of those prongs of the trident. And the three goddesses are visualized enthroned on those three lotuses. With Parā in the center, the viewer's center, Aparā, the lower, on the viewer's right, and Parāparā on the viewer's left. Now, of course in reality, the text will say that Aparā is on the left and Parāparā is on the right, but that's from *Parā's* point of view. From the viewer's point of view, _sāda_ bhavet pṛṣṭhayā, rather than _sājya_ bhavet pṛṣṭhayā. It's that way round. 

The next verse: "I offer my homage to the goddess," Devīm, "who resides within the body, within the substance, the very substance," _śarīrasthām_ "of the dancing one, whose form is Bhairava." So, why "dancing"? Because this corresponds to the _śa_ — the _śakti_ of action, _kriyā_. This verse is to be understood as adoring the goddess in her modality as ich — uh, as _kriyā_, as action. The first, as in her modality, is uh, pre-cognitive impulse. And I'll come back to that and try and explain it. 

So, the second verse is addressed, not to Parāparā, as you might expect, going through the list from top to bottom, but to the third goddess, _kriyā_, in _ka_ — goddess Aparā uh, equated with uh _kriyā_. Hence, she is within the body of Śiva, as he dances in his Bhairava form. _Prāvṛṇmēghagaṇavyomā vidyullekhāvilāsinīm_. _Vilāsinīm_, with all the beauty, the _vilāsa_, the charm, the beauty of a streak of lightning, _vidyullekheka_, within, understand, within _prāvṛṇmēghagaṇavyomā_, a sky which is densely filled, _gaṇā_, with monsoon clouds. _Prāvṛt_ is "monsoon." _Prāvṛṇ_, before the _makāra_, so _prāvṛṇmēghagaṇavyomā_, a sky which is full of monsoon clouds. 

Now, what is the point of this image? The point is to allude to the color of this deity, which is a reddish black, dark, but tin — tinged with red. And you have to visualize the monsoon clouds, the flash of lightning illuminating it from the inside, giving it a reddish or orange tinge. So, the goddess is called Kṛṣṇapiṅgalā. The color is defined in Sanskrit as Kṛṣṇapiṅgalā. I say "defined," which is perhaps not the right word, because Indian color words in Sanskrit are actually very difficult to pin down. They don't divide the spectrum up in quite the way we might expect. We have the same problem with ancient Greek, by the way. Sometimes it's difficult to see exactly how colors are being percei — color words are being understood. So, if you look up Kṛṣṇapiṅgalā in your Sanskrit dictionaries, uh, anyone you care to choose, it — it will tell you that it means "brown." So, black, red, put them together, what you get? Some kind of muddy brown. Um, but this is *not* what is intended, because we have other passages um, in which the same goddess is described um, and from that it comes, becomes clear that he means um, either very dark red, or if you prefer, reddish black, a mixture of the two colors. So um, what we have is a white goddess, Parā, um, this dark red goddess, Aparā, and the goddess uh Parāparā, the intermediate goddess who embodies _pramāṇa_, who embodies uh, uh _jñānam_ um, and _śakti_ itself, though, is red, bright red, crimson red. 

And so we've had two of the goddesses, we expect the third now, and we see the following: _Dīptajyotiśścatāpluṣṭavedabandhatrayaṃ sphuratjñānaśūlaṃ satpakṣavipakṣoddhāracakṣamam._ "I pray that" — this is the sense of _stu_ — "may it remain." So, "I pray that the radiant trident of knowledge," _sphuratjñānaśūlaṃ_, "which is _dīptajyotiśścatāpluṣṭavedabandhatrayaṃ_, which has already burnt away," _pluṣṭa_, understand, "in me, the three bonds of duality," _vedabandhatrayaṃ_, "with its blazing floods of — of — of fire," _dīptajyotiśścatā_. _Dīpta_ means "blazing", _jyotiś_ is "fire" or "light," _catā_ means, is what, "masses." 

So, "I pray that the radiant trident of knowledge, that has already burnt away in me the three bonds of duality, with its blazing floods of fire, may now enable me to remove all views that stand in the way of the one true awareness. Let it be," _stu_, _cakṣamaṃ_, "capable, able," of the extirpation, _ut_- _kāraṇa_, literally "cutting out." It *is* a trident after all, it's a cutting instrument. "Let it extirpate all views that oppose the true view," _satpakṣavipakṣa_. _Vipakṣa_ is the "counter view," whatever is _jñāna_, or whatever. The _satpakṣa_ is the "true view," um, rooted in — in his concept of enlightened knowledge. 

Now, at first sight, Abhinavagupta appears to be addressing here only two goddesses, in the first and second of these three verses. And in fact, to be naming only one of them, Parā, in the first of these three verses. And doing even that in an ambiguous manner, since the name could be read here simply as an adjective or attribute, _parā_ meaning "supreme," which cou — which could qual — which could um, apply to any deity. The meaning would then be, uh, the supreme goddess, _parāṃ devīm_, rather than "the goddess Parā." 

In place of an explicit invocation of a third goddess, we are given, in the third of these verses, an invocation of the liberating power of knowledge. _Jñānaśūla_: "May the trident of knowledge," etc. uh, have the power to eliminate all views that oppose the true view. However, the *next* verse will give us further information about the entities just invoked in these three verses. And in doing so, it will refer to them as _tad eva devītrayam_, "these same three goddesses," the same set of three goddesses, _tad eva devītrayam_. So, this necessitates the realization, if the reader hadn't already had it, that Abhinavagupta intends us to understand that he is invoking *three* goddesses in these verses, and three powers equated with them. Only one goddess, namely Parā, has been named, and only one of the powers, namely, knowledge. But, knowing that three goddesses have been addressed, and being familiar, as any educated Śaiva Ācārya would be, with the three powers, the reader readily infers that Abhinavagupta is tacitly equating Parā, the highest of the three goddesses, with pre-cognitive impulse, *icchā*; that the unnamed goddess *must* be Aparā, equated with action, and the lowest of the three powers, since she is described as manifest in the active, dancing form of Bhairava, um, as the power intermediate between pre-cognitive impulse and action, so therefore Parāparā, equated with the — with the knowledge, or _jña_-, talking about the _jñānaśūla_.

In the first verse of this set of three, Abhinavagupta adores Parā as enthroned on the three lotuses, placed on the cusps of the prongs of a trident, evoking the design of the Trika's maṇḍala. This may be puzzling, since it amounts to saying that Parā is enthroned as all three of the goddesses, of which she is one. "He's enthroned on all three." Which is enthroned as all three. Uh, the goddess Parā, white in color, being visualized, seated on the lotus above the central prong, red Parāparā on that to Parā's right, and reddish-black Aparā on that to her left. But this is in — indeed, exactly our author's intention. As we have seen, he has invoked Kāla and Kārṣṇī in the first verse of the Tantrāloka, as the state in which the three powers and the three goddesses are undifferentiated, in the state of absolute potential, equated with the power of bliss, or the "heart," as he called it, in that first verse. Here, the same reality is presented in its initial projection as the power of pre-cognitive impulse, in which her differentiation into the three modalities is adumbrated, is um, on the point of emerging. The three modalities, which I haven't been uh, added to that list, being non-duality, duality in non-duality, and pure duality. Or multiplicity, if you prefer. Um, so non-duality, um, multiplicity, and multiplicity grounded in non-duality, perceived as united in one reality. Uh, this is also expressed in the verse, through the intimately related concept of the triad of the agent, means, and objects of consciousness. 

As for the goddess addressed in the second of these verses, once one has realized that she *must* be the power of action, _kriyāśakti_, and therefore Aparā, one finds confirmation in her description as resembling lightning in a dense mass of monsoon clouds. For, this evokes the color ascribed to Aparā in her iconography. Jayaratha takes the description to convey that she is Kṛṣṇapiṅgalā, "reddish black," and this is indeed the color with which her physical form is to be visualized, according to the Trika scripture, _siddhāyogeshvarīmata_. And also by Abhinavagupta in the account of — very vague account of — iconography, at least of the color, given elsewhere by Abhinavagupta. That she embodies the power of action can be inferred from her description as one with Śiva, in his dancing Bhairava form. "In this mode," as Jayaratha puts it, "she is fully immersed in her nature as action, in as much as it is she that is generating the infinite diversity of the world." So, as an actor takes on multiple moods and expres — expresses a great variety of sentiments, so likewise, the goddess clear — clearly assumes the multiplicity of the universe. 

That Abhinavagupta should have invoked knowledge here, as re — presenting the goddess Parāprā, may also surprise, since the power between pre-cognitive impulses and action is more properly referred to as the power of cog — nition. I have translated the Sanskrit expression *jñāna-śūlam* as "the trident of know — ledge," rather than as "the trident of cog — nition," because I take Ab — hinavagupta to be re — ferring primarily to his *own* knowledge, as the mani — festation of the power of cognition embodied in this goddess. The trident of know — ledge then, is his own state of enlightenment, and by exten — sion, the *Tantrāloka* that embodies it. 

In sup — port of this reading, I can point to the 16th of the verses that close his earlier work, his prose commentary, the *Tri — śikā-vivaraṇa*, where he has used the ex — pression, "trident of knowledge," *jñāna-triśūla*, in exactly this way. And you have it on your handout, I believe. Yes, it's item uh, lowercase Roman um, two uh, two, at the bottom of page one, beginning with the word *brāhmaṇato*. I rather like this verse, I couldn't resist in — cluding it. 

*brāhmaṇato brahma-yanti mando deśa-rāṣṭre jantu-cakram-caraṇ* 
*svātmī- *kṛtya guṇā- *vidhāna-vaśa- *to vadhvā dudham bandha- *nī* 
*dṛṣṭvā tam guru- *bhāra-vāha-vidhaye yatānuyā- *tān paśūn* 
*tat-pā- *śa-pravi-kartta- *nāya gatitam *jñāna-triśū- *lam mayā* 

"Gurus," understand, it's about gurus. "Gurus of little wisdom, being confused themselves," *brāhmaṇatāḥ*, "are mis — leading the foolish. They make them their disciples through self-promotion, and then bind them tightly with bonds so that they cannot escape. Having seen the unawakened going, one after a — nother, to take up this heavy burden," or "this burden of the guru," or "the *false* gurus," "I have fa — shioned this trident of knowledge, to cut through their bonds." Interesting statement. He wants to provide people with a text, which will protect them against the scoundrels out there who are posing as gurus. Don't worry, this is nothing new. False gurus have always a — bounded, perhaps always been in the vast majority. 

I feel myself extremely fortunate to have been the student of a man who, in spite of being venerated as virtually a deity in his community, never behaved in any way which could *possibly* be open to criticism. He was a — a perfect gent. 

Um, now, one would not expect to find any al — lusion to the iconography of Parāprā, in a verse that approached her through this symbol that replaces her anthropomorphic form, the trident of knowledge. Nonetheless, the reference to its blazing floods of fire may well allude to her redness. 

So, the three bonds of du — ality that Abhinava — gupta tells us have been eliminated by this knowledge, are the three impurities, known as *āṇavam*, *māyīyam*, and *karmam*. The *āṇavam* is the radi — cal state of con — traction of consciousness that constitutes the individualized sub — jectivity, which we, indivi — duals, accept to be our nature. It's often glossed by these authors as *apūrṇam-manyate*, the state of believing that you are uh, not full, not complete, contracted. An innate knowledge of contraction. The second, the *māyīyam*, which fo — llows from the first, is the belief that what a — ppears in our consciousness is a plurality of dis — junct entities, independent of our consciousness. Meeting our consciousness from the outside. This is a radical il — lusion, from the non-du — alistic standpoint of Abhinavagupta, for whom everything is dynamic consciousness. No — thing is outside that. The third is the state of subjection to our actions, in which we allow our consciousness to be molded by the im — prints of our actions, good and bad, in conse — quence of that belief in an indepen — dent plurality, limiting our con — sciousness from the outside. So, those are the three bonds that have been burnt a — way by this trident of knowledge. And he hopes it will do the same for us.

Now, in his — in his *next* verse, Abhinavagupta equates the same three goddesses with a fur — ther triad. 

*svātantrya-śakti krama-sam- *sṛṣṭi-kṣā* 
*kramātma- *tā ceti vibhor-vibhūti* 
*tad-eva devī- *trayam an- *tar-asthām* 
*anuttarām me pra- *tayāt-sva-rūpaṃ* 

"I pray that these same three goddesses," *tad-eva devī- *trayam*, "who are the all-pervading glory," *vi — bhūti*, "of the Lord," *vibhor*, "as his power of autonomous action," *svātantrya-śakti*, "his power of autonomy," "his *krama-sam- *sṛṣṭi-kṣā*," "his urge to project succession, or plurality," "and *kramātma- *tā*," "his state of being that successional plurality, his embodiment as that succession it — self. So, I pray that these same three goddesses, who are also um — who constitute the all-pervading glory of the Lord, *vibhoro vibhūti*, may re — main present within me, re — vealing my ultimate nature," *anuttarāṃ me pra- *tayāt sva-rūpaṃ*. 

There's a variant reading, *prakāśam* in — stead of *sva-rūpam*, which is actually quite well attested, um uh, but that would mean uh, "May the same three goddesses remain within me, be e — stablished and remain within me, re — vealing my supreme," *anuttaram*, "unsurpassed, *prakāśam*, light," which I think is less appropriate, so I have gone for the more contextually, uh, suitable of the two readings. 

Here, according to Jayaratha, Abhinavagupta is equating the same three goddesses with another all-en — compassing triad, central to the Trika, namely, Śi-va, *śakti*, his power — sorry, Śi-va — Śiva's power, *śakti*, and *aṇu*, *aṇutara*, the last literally "person," meaning "the indi — vidual soul." The triad is not, in itself, distinctive; it could be found, as I said earlier, widely in Śaivism. But what's unique in this particular doctrine is the idea that *aṇu* is simply a mo — dality of one reality, namely consciousness, not a plurality of e — ternally distinct souls. Um, and we see a si — milar reference to this triad um, in uh, the *Triśikā-vivaraṇa* — the word often — the work more commonly known as the *Parā- *triṃśikā-vivaraṇa*, but Ab — hinavagupta calls the work *Triśikā*, so I follow his lead here, and call it the *Triśikā-vivaraṇa*. So, there he declares, and this is, I think, the *next* thing on your handout. Um, on the next page, two, you have um, halfway down, you have an item three, in lowercase uh, uh, Roman numerals. 

Abhinavagupta, *Tri- *śikā-vivaraṇa*, introductory verse three: 

*nara-śakti-śivātmakaṃ trikam* 
*hṛdaya- *ya vinidā- *ya-vāsayet* 
*pranamā- *mi parā-man- *nuttarāṃ nija- *bhāsāṃ prati- *bhā-camat- *kṛtim* 

"I bow in homage," *pranamāmi*, "before Parā," *parām*, "the untranscen — ded, self-revealing rapture, that is the innate creativity of con — sciousness." A similar word — ing that one we saw in verse two, *naumi cit-prati- *bhāṃ devīm*. "So, I bow in homage be — fore Parā, the untranscended, self-revealing rapture uh, *nija- *bhāsām*, "self-revealing," "rapture," *camat- *kṛtim*, "that is the innate creat — creativity of consciousness," *pratibhā* *camat- *kṛtim*, "as that I am meditating on her, as that which mani — fests the triad, which consists of the triad of the indivi — dual, *śakti*, and Śiva, while at the same time holding them as one within her core," *hṛdaya- *ya vinidā- *ya vāsayet*, "who reveals them, while holding them in her heart, in the very heart of con — sciousness," which was the subject of the first verse of the *Tantrā- *loka*.

Um, now, you may be interested to know, actually, how these goddesses were visualized. Abhinavagupta backs away from visualization, on the whole. As you know — as you *may* know, or if you don't know this, um, in the hierarchy of representations of deity, iconography comes below mantra. The intimate nature of the — of uh, the ineluctable nature of a deity is actually this, the mantra. You can add a visualization — and generally, visualization *is* added — but it is dispens — able. And indeed, there are a number of uh, esoteric cultures, or procedures, or sets of systems of worship in which there is *no* iconography, but o — nly a mantra. But, to my knowledge, there are *no* deities worshipped without mantra at all. So, the minimum kit is the mantra. Uh, and in most Tantric traditions, also, there's the visuali — zation. So, for Chand — bhareva has his mantra, which is his core reality, but he *also* has a physical form which is visualized, but that is, in principle, a kind of additional prop uh, of meditation, which is dispens — able. So, in that spirit, Abhinavagupta has never, anywhere in his works, given us a clear indication of the vi — sualization of these three core god — desses of the Trika. You could say, "Well, it's somehow esoteric. He doesn't want to reveal that." But I think it's *more* that he wants us to contemplate these deities, not as deities having *form*, but as dissolved into metaphysical concepts, which we can identifyin our meditation on consciousness, rather than on deities projected as external realities. 

But, since you may be curious, I have added, in your handout, um, a complete uh, passage taken from the *Siddhayogeshvarī-mata* um, which is a text close to the tradition of Abhinavagupta, belonging to the Trika, the *Mālinī-vijayottara*, which is the principal text of the Trika that Ab — hinavagupta claims to be based upon, the *Siddhayogeshvarī-mata*, and you can read through that in your own time, and you will see that basically, Parā is a white god — dess uh, benevolent, um embodying knowledge. She shows the gesture of wisdom, she holds a manuscript in her hand. In fact, she looks very much like Prajñāpāramitā, in the Bu — ddhist case, the embodiment of the perfection of wisdom. Aparā is a ferocious Kāpālika goddess, terri — fying um, garlanded with skulls, etc., etc. Her ears ornamented with severed hands — all sorts of rather grim features. Of course, what she is out to destroy is your limitations, rather than one's enemies. Um, and uh, the god — dess Parāprā is *kiṃcid-ugra- *na-tu-bhīṣaṇā*: "rather ferocious, but not terrifying." She's intermediate: she's red and a *little* bit scary, but not frightening you to your core. Whereas, Uparā is a much more terrifying, classic Kālī-like-type goddess. And if you read through that, I've given you a translation there, um, you'll see the — the iconography for yourselves. Now, I won't dwell on that here. You'll even see the mantras, in — in the footnotes, I think. Um, yeah, just in case you feel inclined to propitiate these — these deities yourself. But don't do it without prior initiation. 

Um, and you see, in that passage, a very — a kind of style of _shakta_ rhetoric, which *pervades* the literature. It's a good example of it: the rhetoric of ferocious deities. 

Yeah. In fact, I think we can say that we don't *know* exactly how Abhinavagupta — if he *did* perform a visualization, or his contemporaries, presumably, *did* — exactly what *was* the form of Parā visualized? We have complete visualization texts from South India, for the goddess Parā, based upon the *Triśikā*, and there, she is white, one-faced and two-armed, showing the *varada mudrā*, or *jñāna mudrā*, and a manuscript in her hand. So, we *have* iconography to that effect. And I think I've also given on your handout, um, one I recently encountered in the South Indian text, which I hadn't noted before, which *also* encodes a mantra at the same time, as giving some indication of her iconography. She's referred to here as holding a manuscript of her scripture, and showing the gesture of awakening — the two gestures I referred to. 

But the *one* passage in the Kashmirian learned literature that actually *describes* her form, occurs in a quotation in Jayaratha's commentary on the *Tantrāloka*. I've given that as item lower-case Roman numeral seven, on page four, towards the bottom. Um, indicates *another* form of Parā, in which she is white, fine, but four-armed and four-faced. So, if — if — if you think I've pinned it down, I *haven't*. It's *still* open! We've not entirely sure how it would have been visualized in the standard procedure. And *perhaps* that wasn't a standard procedure. There's a great deal of variety, and individual pūjā-s can follow this or that variety. So, if someone commissioned you to write a pūjā, for the worship of Parā, take your pick! Um, I'd go for the two-armed form myself, 'cause it's well-attested, but you *could* also produce a four-armed form, so long as it fitted the _rasa_, as it were. It would be fine. I think there's considerable freedom in the construction of these — of these um, visualizations. 

Now, having invoked the goddesses of the Trika in the first five verses, Abhinavagupta now turns, in the sixth, to what might seem to be a much more mundane level of religiosity. He prays for the blessing of the elephant-headed god Gaṇapati, or Gaṇeśa, the deity to whom all turn, whoever the principle object of their devotion may be, when they are about to start any major *task*, venerating him as the "removal of obstacles." The removal of obstacles. However, in this case, the object of invocation is not the Gaṇapati of common faith, but that deity transmuted into the highest reality, in the ground of consciousness. The idiom of this transmutation belongs, however, not to the Trika, but to the Krama, the system on whose more or less covert presence, in the heart of Abhinavagupta's Trika, I have remarked several times. 

This is immediately uh, signaled to the informed reader by the mention in this verse of *mahāmārīci*, the "Great Rays." This is a — a signature term of the Krama. 

*Taddevatāvibhavābhāvimahāmārīci cakreśvarāyatanijastitirekaivā devīsūtagaṇapatiḥ sphurandukāntiḥ samyaksaṃ ucchalayattāṃ mama saṃvidam.* 

I pray to Gaṇapati, Devīsūta, the son of the goddess, that solitary deity, *ekā*, whose inner nature is to become — whose *nijasthiti*, whose inner nature, is to become the master of the circle, *cakreśvarāyita*, of the Great Rays, *mahāmārīci*, which are *taddevatāvibhava*, the expansion of those goddesses we have just adored — those three, plus one. *Taddevatāvibhavābhāvi* *vibhavābhāvi*, which are the expansion of those god — those deities. *Taddevatāvibhavābhāvi mahāmārīci cakreśvarāyatanijastitirekaivā devīsūtagaṇapatiḥ sphurandukāntiḥ*. Um, so may this Gan — may I pray that this Gaṇeśa, this Gaṇapati, who has the beauty of a — of a radiant moon, indicating his brightness, *sphurandukāntiḥ*, may he, thoroughly, completely, *samyak*, stir up, cause to swell, cause to *rise*, the ocean of my consciousness, the ocean of my awareness, *mama saṃvidam*. 

So, although he is to be seen as enlightened, in — in — in the traditional uh, o — of this text, he doesn't fall into the illusion of thinking that he's *permanently* in that state. So, he prays that this — that Gaṇeśa will, as it were, *activate* him, stir up, cause to swell like the ocean, at the time of the uh, the moon shining upon it, the tide. May it — may this um, moon-like Gaṇapati, cause my — the ocean of my consciousness to rise, to swell, as — as in a tide. 

According to Jayaratha, these great — these Great Rays, these *mahāmārīci*, are the goddesses that are the 12 faculties. Namely, the five faculties of action: grasping, locomotion, utterance, erotic pleasure, and evacuation; the five sense-faculties: hearing, feeling — that's touch — seeing, tasting, and smelling; and two of the three mental faculties, namely, selective attention, *manas*, and intellection, *buddhi*. Gaṇapati himself is equated by Jayaratha with the third, namely, *ahaṃkāra*, I-generation — the generating of "I" — by virtue of which, you know your cognitions to be *your* cognitions. 

In support of this equation, he cites a verse of obeisance to Gaṇapati from an undeclared source. *Dinakarasama mahādādigaṇapatipatāṃ vahanti yonamas tasmai*. "I bow to him who functions as the Gaṇapati, as the leader of the sun-like group," *dinakarasama mahādādigaṇapatipatāṃ* *vahanti*, "in which, intellection," *mahān* equals *buddhi*, "is the first," *mahādādi*. 

He understands the name Gaṇapati then, not as the leader of the Gaṇas, the attendants of Śiva, but esoterically as the I-generation, or I-awareness, that presides over the group of the 12 faculties, sustaining and pervading the operation of the other 12, compared — compared here to the 12 sons of the — the 12 months of the year. 

This, in my view, fails to see Abhinavagupta's true intention. I'm of the opinion that Jayaratha is *right* to see Gaṇapati here as I-generation, *ahaṃkāra*, but not right to identify the "Great Rays" with the other 12 faculties. For, this does not allow an adequate explanation of why the "Great Rays" are described here as the expansion, or extension of these goddesses. That is to say, of Parā, Parāparā, and Aparā. 

Jayaratha tells us that Abhinavagupta says this because, "nothing exists, except through the expansion, uh, or extraversion of the pure light of these deities." Quotes, "Whatever were not grounded in these, would be no more real than a flower imagined in the sky." But if everything is real *only* through these goddesses, then there's no reason to say so in this *particular* case. The description should evoke, not an empty generalization, but a *specific* connection between the Trika's goddesses and the Great Rays. I see no such connection in the literature of the tradition if the latter are the 12 faculties, and there is none in Jayaratha's reading. 

Secondly, he undermines this equation, by interpreting the word *cakreśvarāyita*, which is a neuter, as meaning, "acting *as though* he were the master of the circle," of the faculties. So, to take a denominative, which is what *cakreśvarāyita* *is*, in this case, a verb formed by suffixing *āyati*, or *āyate*, to a noun base, to mean "acting like" that known that noun denotes — *ekṣvadācārati*, um, *cakreśvarāyati*, "he behaves *like* the _cakreśvara_," like him, "he who is the lord of the circle." But, this cannot apply here. To be equated with I-generation, or I-cognition, Gaṇapati *must* be that master in actuality, not merely act as though he were. 

So, Jayaratha has missed the only and evidently correct alternative, which is to take the denominative to mean "becomes N," rather than "acts like N." "Becomes X," rather than "acts like X." That's an alternative which is grammatically um, arguable or permissible. 

Thirdly, Jayaratha's interpretation does not do justice to the words *nijasthiti*, literally, "own state," "innate state," which occurs at the end of the long compound. I've rendered this as, "whose inner nature is to become." *cakreśvarāyata nijastiti*. In *his* analysis — Jayaratha's analysis — it is as though, "acting like N" and "having an own state that acts like N," were synonymous. In other words, I suspect that he does not see the difference, taking *nijasthiti* silently, in some such meaning as "own-state," or "self," in such a way that there is no difference that requires explanation. "Having a self that acts," and "acting," being different in formulation, but not in substance. It will be more satisfactory if this element *does* some work in the verse, differentiating surface identity and *true* identity. In the interpretation that I shall now propose, it does just that. 

A fourth indication that Jayaratha has gone astray is that, while the term "Great Rays" is found in the literature of the Krama, it is *never*, to my knowledge, used in the sense that Jayaratha attributes to it here. The term *mārīci*, "ray," is commonly used there in this meaning, but not *mahāmārīci*. The latter has a *quite different* technical sense in the Krama, as we can see in Anantanātha's commentary on the 10th aphorism of the *Vātula Tantrasūtra*, which gives the oral instruction on the Flow of the 12. 

Here, I have to explain something. Within the Krama, there's an additional uh, small corpus of texts, which gives oral instructions um, for those who are seen as able to transcend the world of ritual, and go *directly* to the subliminal structures — conceptual and non-conceptual — that tie self-awareness to this contraction, so that it becomes the pure, radiant consciousness that is the undifferentiated ground, the master of the circle of the powers of consciousness. This is set forth in the sixth and seventh chapters of that work: the first, covering the phase of the rise of ego, and the second, that of the multitude, in terms that parallel the structure that I propose in this verse, invoking **Gaṇapati**. 

Just let me read this. It's — it's the *most remarkable* text of **Abhinavagupta**. It comes to us in a *single*, Malayalam manuscript, full of corruptions, and yet, it's an extremely complex text. So, you can imagine, it's a text editor's nightmare! I had thought that, by my — as I approach my mid-seventies — I would be able to sail through such texts without too much difficulty, but it's *still* a real hard nut to crack. But, I think these passages are adequately ed — edited now. 

"Having meditated on the phase of the rise of ego" — that's the **mūrti cakra** — "which has emerged at the end of the process in which consciousness devours all the various components of time, I shall now expound it with reasoned arguments. Here, the rays that constitute our experience of the radiant expanse of the universe turn back on themselves, and by doing so, dissolve into that whose nature is the purest I-awareness. This sixteenfold phase of bliss that I have just described has now come to rest, by reverting into the perceiver." 

Why 16? Because it's the faculties, plus the objects of sense — the five different kinds of sense data. 

Um, "so here, one experiences the emergence of I-awareness into concrete form, this being the perceiver, the introverted state that emerges in the completion of every enactment of cognitive action." So, there's that rush of extroversion, and *then*, awareness that one *is* extroverted: the I-awareness arises at that point. "So, one experiences the emergence of I-awareness into com — con — into concrete form, this being the perceiver, the introverted state that emerges in the completion of every enactment of cognition, or action. When the extroverted rays dominate one's consciousness, this internal awareness is concealed. But *here*, it emerges clearly, taking on concrete form. *First*, there is the twelvefold ray emanation, that constitutes the extroversion of time." Time here stands for the faculties. "Full of awareness, it comprises the activation of the 12 avenues of experience. This is then brought to fullness by the addition of desire." **Karma**, "as it reaches outwards — that is to say, by its expanding to include the objects of awareness." 

So, the world comprises both time and desire. "When this nature of the world — comprising the sequence of time followed by desire — has been accomplished, and when the rays have thus come to rest, by reaching the outer limit of their expansion into the domain of the objects of experience, *then*, the eye generation that embodies the perceiver emerges into concrete form as the seventeenth, added as the governor of the 16 rays manifested in the phase of bliss" — which is called "bliss," because it — it's the uh, englobing, or uh, encompassing the objects of sensation. "Intent on devouring them through their reverting, and thereby merging with one's inner nature." 

So, this I-consciousness surges up and wishes to *devour* the content. 

"Meditating on this 17 — 17-fold phase of the rise of ego, as emerged in the intrepid act of devouring the universe, comprising the sense data that are relished through desire and the faculties that constitute time, seeing it as residing in the level of consciousness that dissolves the subliminal forces that give rise to the diversity of our various conditions, the set of rays that was at first extroverted has now become fused with the perceiver, that in which these two — the means of experience that are the projection of time, and the objects of experience that are the action that constitutes desire — dissolve, to the extent that they are present only in a latent seed form, in which they are experienced as one, without differentiation. This point is the *channel* through which one can pass into the devouring of time. By carefully observing the phase of the rise of ego in every cycle of cognition, one will *finally* find oneself passing through this aperture, that leads, through the phase of the multitude, into infinitely expanded eye-awareness." 

And in the next chapter, we have a similar, but shorter, passage. "The eye generation that arose as the perceiver in the phase of the rise of ego, now throws off its contraction. Then, through a process of forcible **katharsis**, it completely breaks down and dissolves, stage by stage, the cognitive constituents — internal though they are, conceptual and non-conceptual, positive and negative — of the multitude of rays that remains fused with the perceiver in a latent seed state, as a subliminal force that sustains the contraction of awareness, through object-consciousness. And this supreme **hero, Bhairava**, whose defining characteristic is the highest I-generation," first, so **paramahaṃsā**, "first achieves the *prior worship*" — that is to say, "the simultaneous, complete dissolution of all the rays, and so, enters a state of undifferentiated experience." Then, "immediately *after* the prior worship, the same hero, who has now become the master of the circle, and so, is conjoined with his inner circle of **śakti**s, 64 in number, suddenly and violently kills, as a sacrificial victims for the gratification of the circle, all the latent traces — conceptual or non-conceptual — of the rays that have remained after the dissolution of the rays themselves." 

The idea here — the analogy here — is of a human — a *mass*, human sacrifice, performed by the goddesses, in which they offer up all the deities, devouring the universe in the process, until only **Bhairava** remains, and he himself becomes unconscious, which is why the goddess stands on **Bhairava**. **Bhair — Bhairava** awakens from his trance and says, "What was that?" And the goddess then expounds, in the **Kālikrama** **tantra**. **Bhairava** *expands* the teachings of the **krama**. What you have just not witnessed is the following: the inner unfolding of your own nature, which you couldn't get behind and observe. Yeah. 

So, although I can't accept um, uh, **Jaideva** **Bhaṭṭa's** view that the "great rays," to which this verse of **Abhinavagupta** refers, *are* the 12 faculties of cognition and action, I *do* believe that he is right to equate the **Gaṇapati**, to whom this verse is addressed, with the faculty of I-generation, in which the other 12 faculties are grounded. For, as we have seen, enlightenment in the **krama** is precisely the transformation of this limited ego into the ultimate awareness, at the heart of the **krama's** "great rays." 

And I think that would be a good point to stop, if only because my voice is beginning to fade. Thank you. 
