I'm once again delighted to welcome Professor Sanderson, who's going to carry on with his his readings, share his work with us, which I regard as incredibly important. And, um, uh, I think it's absolutely delightful that we're able to, um, uh, listen to Professor Sanderson share his work with us. So rather than me talking, I'll hand it over to you. 

Thank you very much. Um, thank you for coming in out of the nice weather into here. Nice to have someone in the audience! So, um, last, last week we read verses 10 and 11 in which Abhinavagupta offered his obeisance to Utpaladeva as the pupil of Somananda and as the guru of Lakṣmaṇagupta, his own guru in the exegesis or the tradition and exegesis of the **Pratyabhijñā** corpus. And I, my exposition of those verses, um, ended with consideration of the extent to which these authors were also to be recognized not merely as philosophers, but as engaged in forms of **Śaiva** practice. 

And so I showed that both Somananda and Utpaladeva, um, are strongly connected with the **Kaula** tradition. In the case of Somananda, we know that that is the case inasmuch as he wrote a commentary on the, what the work, the work that is commonly referred to as the **Parātriṃśikā**, but is known to Abhinavagupta as the **Triśikā**. So we wrote a commentary on that **Kaula** commentary. It's a **Kaula** work. 

And we know from Utpaladeva, although we have no works that are directly in the exegesis of the **Trika** or the **Krama** or any of these non-dualistic systems, we have his, have a body of poems, of devotional poetry, uh, attributed to him which is redolent of the **Krama**. The **Krama** shines through throughout that corpus of texts. It's very conspicuously present. 

And in that context, I made the point, um, reverting to my previous lecture on Bhūtiraja, that the mainstream of, uh, **Śaiva** non-dualism in Kashmir is dominated not by the **Trika**, but by the **Krama**. And that even though the **Trika** comes up very strong through the **Tantrāloka**, it's a form of **Trika** which has the **Krama** at its heart. Um, and it's a rather, um, it's a tradition which makes big claims for itself. 

And one of those claims, we saw in the lecture on Bhūtiraja, was that essentially the **Gītā** teaches the **Krama**, which is a rather surprising claim. But the main, the, uh, we saw that Maheśvarānanda Nātha, a South Indian guru from around the beginning of the 14th century, uh, tells us that Abhinavagupta taught this in his commentary on the **Kramastotra**, in his **Kramakalikā**. That when, um Kṛṣṇa, uh, assumed his **viśvarūpa** form, his cosmic form at the beginning of the **Mahābhārata** war in order to encourage Arjuna to forget about his scruples and go ahead and do his duty, um, we saw that, um, according to Maheśvarānanda, the **Kramakalikā** sees this as Ar- as, uh, Kṛṣṇa entering into his inner nature as Kālasaṃkarṣiṇī, the goddess Kālasaṃkarṣiṇī, and through a glance initiating Arjuna in his true nature, uh, which is a surprising example of, um, **pādaprasārikā**, sticking your foot in the door, as it were. 

Um, and, um, so we have strong **Krama**, um, influence there. In the early Abhinavagupta, I argued that the early works of Abhinavagupta are pre-**Trika** works dominated by the **Krama**. And we, I've pointed out also that Kṣemarāja never, although he's claims to be a devout, devout disciple of Abhinavagupta, never puts the **Trika** in the center of the picture, but always the **Krama**. He said, at least in two places in his works, surviving works, that the hierarchy of scripture, from the most general to the most specific, from the lowest to the highest, is from the **Veda** to the **Krama**: **Vedādi** **Kramāntam**. 

And it seems that that was also the perspective of Utpaladeva, where the, uh, at the core of his thinking is the **Krama** notion that enlightenment comes about by, um, aesthetic awareness of the process of perception, whereby mind grasps an object and then introverts in the self-recognition of itself as the perceiver of that object. Um, and I think one can argue, um, cogently enough that the, the **Pratyabhijñā** corpus, the **Īśvara Pratyabhijñā Kārikā**, teach this same method in a condensed and de-sectarianized language. 

But again, it's about recognizing the fundamental dynamics of cognition. Liberation through self-recognition by observing the dynamics of cognition, which is essentially what the **Krama** is about. So you could say that there's a kind of Copernican revolution in which the **Krama** is translated into a purely philosophical doctrine enjoining a certain mode of insight or inculcating a certain way of seeing perception as a road to enlightenment. As a means of access to enlightenment. The essential notion here being that in every moment of perception, the enlightened state is revealed to us, but we don't grasp it. That the moment of I-awareness, of **ahaṃ itī** **parāmarśa**, that arises in each moment of cognition is a conduit through which one, one can enter into fully expanded awareness and which leaves behind the ego and contracted self. 

So I think that core idea is informing the **Pratyabhijñā** texts, and it comes from the **Krama**, the Kashmirian elaboration of the **Krama**, perhaps we should say, because the **Krama** scriptures themselves rather lack this degree of sophistication. Now, uh, he has one more guru to introduce us to, and that is the most important of all in the context of this work, the **Tantrāloka**, and that is Shambhunātha. But he's next week! 

In fact, if I had enough weeks, I could go on for quite a long time about Shambhunātha. He's a very interesting figure. Um, but before we get onto Shambhunātha, we have to take a step sideways to acknowledge Abhinavagupta's father, who had a very important role to play in his education. So that's what we're going to look at today. 

But before I take that up, I want to take up, um, the significance of a certain silence, which some may have noticed. I pointed out earlier that Abhinavagupta claims that the **Tantrāloka** draws upon all the **Śaiva**, the main **Śaiva** traditions, which he encapsulates in the doctrine of three and a half lineages or the four lineages, one being intimately associated with another and therefore only counting as a half. 

Um, and we have seen in the previous verses that he acknowledged the, um, the, the **Triambaka** **Saṃtāna**, the non-dualistic, uh, exegesis of, uh, Utpala and others, um, he also acknowledges Bhūtiraja and Maheśvara, covering another aspect of the, of the, of the **Kaula** tradition. Um, and he also has acknowledged the **Śrī** **Saṃtāna**, this mysterious tradition about which we know very little, except that it can be demonstrated it was another **Kaula** tradition connected with Macchandanātha, uh, which, surprisingly, has gone, as it were, into obscurity, except that two of its initiation **mantras** survive in Kashmirian ritual. They are recited, um, over the dead when they're being prepared to be taken to the cremation ground. 

Um, it's an interesting feature of Kashmirian, um, uh, priest worship that very esoteric elements of the, of the, of the **Śaiva** tradition, which seem to have, as it were, disappeared, reappear in the death rituals. So for example, the **Picumata**, this rather extreme **Tantra**, otherwise known as the **Brahmayāmala**, has disappeared from view largely. Uh, certainly Jayaratha couldn't get hold of a copy of it, um, when he was writing his commentary on **Tantrāloka**, because he pretends to understand Abhinavagupta's references to it, and clearly he gets it wrong. 

And I think it's because he had, couldn't get access to a copy, and he assumed that no one else could either. So, okay, just say what you think it means. Of course it's impossible to say, "na jānami." I, I don't know. He could have done that. But, you know, let's pause on that for a moment. 

Why is it impossible to say, "I don't know" inside a prescriptive dogmatic religious system? Well, because if there's any ignorance anywhere, the whole thing collapses. You are saying, "My teacher didn't understand this. *I* don't understand it. You know, maybe *you* understand it?" Once you admit that, you're putting the whole system in danger, you know? So on the whole, the tradition, um, has to maintain its omniscience at all costs. 

But this allows a considerable degree of innovation to occur. Because, of course, it's a human institution and things are forgotten. Um, not everyone keeps up the same level of intimate understanding of every detail. The human brain is lazy. It gets by with what it needs and no more. So when it confronts an exegetical problem, it has to improvise. And so it's in these improvisations that these traditions develop while pretending to be *not* improvising at all, just revealing eternally revealed fact. In fact, they're constantly creating new fact or new belief. Otherwise, the culture would be absolutely static. 

And of course, it's one of the myths about India that it *is* static. You know, the Victorian myth of India: the unchanging village, India. Nothing ever happens, everything is always the same, no sense of history, and the rest. In fact, there's a great deal of change going on, um, which becomes very obvious if you start looking at **Śaivism**. Huge religious changes occurring in the medieval period in India. Um, but of course, it wasn't seen for the most part, because everything was seen through the, the eye of the eternal **Vedas**. Hm. Uh, this empty box, I say "empty" because who knew what they meant for the last 2,000 years? Um, yeah. Injunctions based upon them were understood and implemented, but *understanding*– that's another matter. 

So, um, we're going to look now at, um, this question of why, um, there's no reference to the **Āmardaka Saṃtāna**, the dualistic tradition of the, of the **Siddhānta** in these acknowledgements. He said that, "This work of mine, the **Tantrāloka**, exudes the essences of all these traditions, including **Siddhānta**". So why hasn't he mentioned, um, his guru who taught him in this particular tradition? 

And we know he did have a guru in that tradition, um, because he mentions him at the end of the **Tantrāloka**, in the thir-, the final 37th chapter of the work. And you'll see that, um, uh, in, um, uh, items two and three on your handout.  

Um, ā**marda**saṁti-,  
-timahārṇava-,
karṇadhārāḥ,
sadaiśikāyira-,
kavārātmaja-,
vāmanāthaḥ. So, I'm drawing your attention to two and three. 
Ā**marda**saṁtimahārṇavakarṇadhārāḥ, sadaiśikāyiravarātmajavāmanāthaḥ. So, he's going through his teachings in this little passage. He's actually going through the teaching that his teachers (in each of these three and a half, uh, *saṁtāras* or *saṁtitis*) [???]. And he begins with that of the ā**marda**saṁtiti. 

Now, you'll notice from the apparatus there that I have corrected that to ā**marda**. The manuscripts that I've consulted, um, all read *ānandā*. I've only given the crucial manuscripts there, as does the edition in the Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies. That, of course, is not in itself evidence, but it's a view, a hypothesis. Um, and I've emended *ānandā* to ā**marda**. You may think that's cheeky, um, but you know when textual corruption occurs, it's usually the substitution of the banal for the unusual: a scribe losing his intention, uh, full attention for a moment (maybe he's itching behind the ear or something), you know, he, without thinking, um, substitutes, sees what is familiar on the page rather than what is actually there. 

And you should know that *nda* and **rda** in the Śāradā script, um, are virtually indistinguishable. So, here's, that's a *da*, that's an *nda*. Hmm. And that's a **rda**. They're indistinguishable, actually, because Kaśmīrī is usually written, um, Sanskrit is usually written by Kaśmīrī and scribes with a very thick pen, which I can't reproduce here. But, you know, when it, it's done very small, it's really difficult to, to see the difference. Um, so someone looking at that sees *a-* something *nda*. Hmm. 

And so, the confusion is simply of *m* and *n*. And if you doubt it, then you have to look at item three, um, which reads: śrīsaṁtiti-triyambakā-
khyā tadā**rda**mā**rda**saṁ-  
hitā ittham a**rdha**cata-
srotṛmaṭikā śāṅkare-
kramāt. 

In the tradition taught by Śiva, śāṅkare-kramāt, there are, in this way, *ittham*, he's summarizing, four, three and a half *a**rdha**catasrotṛ*: half-four means "three and a half". Hmm. There are here in this tradition revealed by Śiva, *atra*, śāṅkare-kramāt, in this way, *ittham*, three and a half *maṭikā*, three and a half hospices. Actually, it is a technical term: it means "traditions", like lodges, three and a half lodges. The *śrīsaṁtiti*, that's that mysterious, not very well understood *kaula* system, that called the *triyambakā*, the *triyambakasaṁtāna*, the non-dualistic. *Tadā**rda***, which means "that which has half of that". That's the *a**rdha**triyambakalīneage*, transmitted through the, through Triyambakā's daughter according to traditions as the *kaula sampradāya*, and then that called ā**marda**. 

And if you look at the apparatus there, you'll see again there's disagreement. But the reading ā**marda** is well supported. Hmm. And my best manuscript, which is *W*, which is a manuscript of the *mūla* alone, the root text alone, uninfluenced by the transmission of the commentary, um, has the right reading before correction. That's what *AC* means, *ante correctionem*, "before correction". So before some person went along and made it wrong by correcting it, the scribe had ā**marda** there, which is the correct reading. Um, and you will see there that that reading is, uh, supported by not merely *W* before correction, but also by three other manuscripts that I've consulted and, indeed, by the Kaśmīrīan edition, the, uh, KSTS edition, um, which is worth recording because, in true, uh, *pandit* style, the editors have not recorded their manuscripts. And they don't systematically note the variants given in their manuscripts. So, it's in, so in a way they, they are a witness, but we can't actually get at the primary evidence. And this is how *not* to do textual criticism. Amend, please amend as much as you like, but *record* what's actually in the manuscript, so you can see what your hypothesis is and revise it if we don't like it. 

So I hope I've done that there. If you don't like this, you can, you can decide it's *ānandasaṁtiti*, if you wish. Um, but there's one clinching argument, I think, would, to, to be added to this, and that is that the *saiddhānta*, *saiddhāntika* tradition records of itself in inscriptions that it descends from a mother, uh, monastery called the Ā**marda**kastānam or Ā**marda**kamatyā-maṭhā, in the city of Ā**marda**kā, Ā**marda**kāpuram. And this is now conclusively demonstrated to be the town of **Ongdā**, which is the site of one of the *Jyotirliṅgas*, located in, uh Chhattisgarh, in the far, or rather the far east of, uh, of Mahārāshtra. I'm not sure who has it under their administration at the moment. That area has been redefined somewhat, but it's near Sīripur, in what used to be Dakṣiṇakosala. Hmm. 

So, the, their identity of the place is quite clear, and all Śaiva lineages, um, when they begin their inscriptions, tend to refer to the Ā**marda**ka as a kind of, the place where this tradition was first revealed, transmitted by the ineffable sage Durvāsas to, to human beings, who've then passed it down to us. Hmm. So I think there's no doubt that we're talking about the Ā**marda**. 

So he's saying, "Look, I've got this guru in the Ā**marda**kasaṁtāna. His name is vāmanātha, and he's the son, or possibly pupil (because "son" can be figurative), of a certain Erakanātha." Interestingly, these are not attested typical *Saiddhāntika* initiation names. It's *possible* that vāmanātha is short for (or a substitute for, for metrical reasons) for vāmadevāśiva or vāmaśiva. That's possible. But generally, *nātha* is used in the context of the *śākta*-leaning Śaiva authors. Nonetheless, this guru, whatever his background, was an expert in the *Siddhānta* and trained Abhinavagupta in the *Siddhānta*. 

So we know he had a guru, but he's *not* acknowledging these opening verses, which is telling us something. So why? Hmm. 

So to illumine that question and give an answer to that question, or suggest an answer to that question, um, I've got a passage there on page two. Is it numbered? It should be, four. Yeah. It begins on page two. And this is a passage from, uh, a work which Abhinavagupta, um, wrote on the same *Mālinīvijayottarataṁtra*, the same exegetical focus as the *Tantrāloka*, called the *Mālinīślokavā**rtikā**. Um, and the *vā**rtikā** here is a contentious, analytic commentary, hmm, on the verses of the *Mālinīvijayottara*. 

Now, the text is not well-transmitted, unfortunately, and it wasn't well-studied either. No commentary survives, for example. Um, but it's closely related to *Tantrāloka*, because that helps us understand it. But very often, there are parallel, uh, passages which illumin-, in which, you know, each illumines the other sometimes. Um, but I'm afraid there are many other passages which remain rather obscure. The, the number of manuscripts surviving is limited. They *all* go back to the same defective 19th-century original. I mean, it's, uh, it's amazing that *anything* survived from Kashmir, actually, considering what the Kaśmīrīan Brahmans have had to put up with over the centuries: mass book-burnings under Sikandar, the idol-smasher, and various other delightful tidbits in, in history. Um, in spite of some *very* tolerant Muslim rulers, there were some very intolerant ones. And of course, intolerant rulers destroy, and destruction can't be undone. So that there's quite a lot of damage inflicted on these transmissions as a result. But somehow, Kaśmīrīs kept their heads above water and managed to transmit a great deal of this stuff. 

So here's this, uh, passage. It's been, uh, published in the Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, but also part of it (and part which includes these verses) has been published by a doctor, student of mine, uh, now Professor Hāneda, of Marburg, as his doctoral thesis, um, which is an improvement on, on the Kaśmīrī edition, but still has a number of problems, especially in the translation, in my view. Um, but nonetheless, that's a very impressive piece of work for a doctoral thesis. I think it was a, um, step forward. 

So here is what we have: *tena*. It is *not* the case that those initiated into the teachings of Śiva, *śaiva-saṁskṛtāḥ*. *Śaivam*, *śaive-saṁskṛtāḥ*. Hmm? *Śaiva* means *śivaproktam*: "that which has been taught by Śiva", or "Śaivism", if you like. Uh, I don't much like these "*ism*" words myself, but, uh, it's widely used. 

So those, it is not the case that those who have been initiated into the teachings of Śiva fail to be fully liberated. *Na mucyante na*. It is not the case that they are-, they fail to be liberated. 

As is the case, *asya yathā*, as is the case with those who are committed to non-Śaiva teachings, such as those of Viṣṇu or the Buddha. So there he's making it quite clear. Śaivas are liberated, Vaiṣṇavas and Buddhists are liberat-, -ed from so much bondage, but not *all* bondage. This is the, the Śaiva view, the non-dualistic Śaiva view. All religious systems are efficacious, it's just a question of *how* efficacious they are. Uh, in the case of the Cārvāka view, not very. In the case of the Vaiṣṇava view, fine, pretty liberating, but not *all* the way. So it liberates from so much bondage, *na tu sarvasmāt*, but not from *all* bondage. Yeah. Yeah, sorry, I shouldn't slip into Sanskrit. But there's a very nice passage in the *Tantrasāra*, which says exactly this, and it libera-, liberates from. They liberate from so much, *tāvatā eva mucyate*, *na tu sarvasmāt*. Only the Śaiva revelation reveals [???] from the entirety of bondage, giving definitive and permanent liberation. That's their Śaiva view. Unsurprisingly, it is a religion, and religions generally question the claim of other religions to be fully efficacious. 

Um, so it is not the case that those initiated into the teachings of Śiva fail to be fully liberated, as is the case with those who are committed to non-Śaiva teachings, such as Vaiṣṇavas and Bauddhas. In other words, we're not saying that *Siddhāntins* don't get liberated. That's the first thing he's saying. *Siddhāntins* are also Śaivas, and all Śaivas are fully liberated at death, at least. Um, and this is true if they have been initiated into the teaching of Śiva, be it the *Atimārga*, the *Krama*, the *Kula*, the *Trika*, or any other current of his diverse revelation: they all work. There is no difference at all as far as the attainment of liberation is concerned for those who have been properly initiated into the teachings of Parameśvara, "Supreme Lord Śiva". 

When you say "properly initiated"– because you can be *improperly* initiated, and that's the fault of the guru. You turn up, um, you make generous gifts, and the guru is seduced into thinking, "Oh yeah, this guy is genuinely motivated. Shiva *wants* him to be liberated. I'll go ahead and do the initiation ritual." But in fact, the guy is a con artist. He's not sincere and will fall away immediately from his obligations, convert to Vaiṣṇavism or Buddhism or whatever. 

So something has gone wrong. That person has not been *truly* initiated. You can't say that the initiation didn't work. Initiation is, by very definition, effective and efficacious. So all that can happen is, is that the guru misreads the signs, saying that Shiva wants you to do the initiation when in fact He doesn't want you to do it. Okay. So that's why he says, "truly initiate", or "correctly initiated", "properly initiated". 

Nor is there any root of access to full liberation apart from this. So it's quite dogmatic and clear. Only Śaivism works; the others don't work fully. And it works for all Śaivas: there's no difference here. Um, so then he goes on to say, "Not only, um, is there, is this true, is there no difference at all as far as the attainment of liberation is concerned for those who have been properly initiated. There's also no root of access to full liberation, to full liberation, other than Śaivism." I think he's made his point fairly unambiguous. 

It is just that now he's going to explain the difference. "It is just that in some systems", *kevalaṃ kvāpi*, "in some systems, such as ours", *asmāddarśaneṣu* (notice the plural: it's, he recognizes a kind of field of meditation practice or systems or worship systems which are valid and, um, bring about the highest result: the *Trika*, the *Krama*, and so forth), "It's just that in some systems, such as ours, the highest success arises", *paraḥ siddhi arises*, *anāyāsa*, "without effort", effortlessly, *anāyāsa*. Um, "and through a liberation which is attained while one is still alive."

So this is the crucial thing. Can the system, the Śaiva system, give you *jīvanmukti*, or just *mukti*, *videhamukti*, liberation once the body falls away? The standard Śaiva doctrine is that that, um, you have initiation performed, nothing changes, you're just the same person, but you're laden with certain obligations the rest of your life as an initiate. But when you die, because the initiation has been performed, there's been a subliminal transformation which comes into view once death occurs. So you're not expected to go through any spiritual transformation in *this* life. Be quite nice if you do, and we appreciate it, no doubt, if after initiation the person became more pious, more saintly, or whatever, more detached from worldly ambition and the like, but they recognize that this is not usually the case, just as with, uh, people who convert to *any* religion: some seem more pious after the event, others are much the same rather unpleasant people they were before. It's, we have to deal with that fact. 

Um, so, um, "while in other systems", and he means in other systems, such as the *Siddhānta*, "the ultimate reward is achieved slowly through a gradual sequence of meditations on one level after another in the ascending order of āṇtic strata, or levels of reality from Earth to Śiva". 

So he's referring here to, um, uh, liberation through Yoga, uh, occurring through graded meditations on the ascending hierarchy of *tattvas*. And this is, um, by the way, typical not only of the *Siddhāntins'* Yoga, but also of the *Mālinīvijayottaras'* Yoga, which, again, teaches a graded hierarchy towards the goal. These Śākta non-dualists are, um, are philologically inaccurate when they claim that all these Śākta texts are teaching non-dualism. Only *some* contain non-dualistic teachings, and these are read into the whole corpus. Hm. Uh, in fact, a work like the *Mālinīvijayottara* is *not* non-dualistic: it teaches a gradualist, hierarchical ascent to liberation, and it also teaches elaborate ritual. 

So our text ends here by saying, "Um, while in others, such as the *Siddhānta*, the ultimate reward is achieved slowly through a gradual sequence of meditations on one level after another in the ascending order of āṇtic strata from Earth to Śiva, and through many and various rituals." So the contrast is being made between a gradualist and ritualistic Śaivism, which is the Śaivism of the majority, um, which is identified with the *Siddhānta*, but is also to be found *outside* the *Siddhānta*: in the *Svacchanda* system, the *Netra* system, and so, and so forth. That, on the one hand, and a kind of spontaneous, instantaneous, *anāyāsist*, um, Zen-like approach, um, in which there is a doctrine of sudden enlightenment. 

And of course, to have a doctrine of sudden enlightenment (the idea that you could be in your body, as it were, but enlightened *without* the limitations of physicality), you need to have a metaphysics which says, "There *is* no physicality. It's all consciousness. Consciousness manifests as though there *were* physicality, but in fact it's all just sentience." So you need to have a, a mind-only doctrine in order to accomplish [this]; otherwise, how on Earth am I going to be liberated when my consciousness is trapped inside this skull, you know? It's not going to be, uh, it's not going to appear very convincing. 

So, um, this seems, this seems to be the idea, that the *Siddhānta* is, uh, recognized, fully recognized by Abhinavagupta: he refers to its sources repeatedly in *Tantrāloka*, but he doesn't give it the honor of, uh, of congratulating, or offering obeisance to, the person who taught him that system at the beginning of *Tantrāloka*. And because it's not a means to liberation in life, I think that's the, the crucial thing here. Of course, it's possible– Oops! I left him out! I *did* mention him in verse 37! It's possible, but I think Abhinavagupta's a very *conscious* uh, author. He's unlikely to have just slipped in that way: he's omitted him for a reason. 

Now, um, before going on to, uh, deal with Shambhunātha and his special relationship with Shambhunātha, um, we come to this question of his father. So before Abhinavagupta turns to Shambhunātha, he prays for the favor of his father, Narasiṃhagupta. That rather implies that his father had passed on by then. Um, and he, he refers to him using his vernacular name. He has *two* names. He has a Sanskritic name, Narasiṃhagupta, and he has a name by which he is known by the general population, *Lokeprasiddha Nāmāntaram*, and another name current among the folk, the people, and that is Chukhalaka or Chukhala, um, which is a Kashmiri name. 

And I think we, I'd take this opportunity to point out that Kashmiri is *not* like Bengali or Hindi: something that developed in the medieval period out of a supposed "Middle Indic" phase of the language, that gradually transformed into what we now recognize as Bengali, Gujarati, Rajasthani, or whatever. It's an ancient language! The, the ancestors of the Kashmiris have been speaking their own language for a very long time, and I think we have evidence of that in the *Mahābhārata*. But even if that is questioned, um, which I think, I think the evidence I've found *does* stand up to scrutiny, but I'm not an expert on the history of, uh, um, Indo-Aryan languages. I would like other people to assess this. Um, but we certainly know that, in Abhinavagupta's time, Kashmiri is a fully developed, separate language. It's not in some stage of transition, "Middle Indic", moving towards, uh, "New Indo-Aryan". It's a really different language. And we have evidence not only from Abhinavagupta's references to words in Kashmiri; we have [evidence] from Kṣemendra, the satirist, who works in vernacular expressions into his humorous satires. And we have [evidence] from India's first, uh, commentator of genius, Albīrūnī, the great Albīrūnī, the great scientist Albīrūnī, who had Kashmiri informants. He couldn't *get* into Kashmir, uh, because Kashmir had really pulled down the drawbridge at that period. They, they were rather worried about Muhamad of Ghazni getting in. Um, uh, in any case, it was a very isolated community, but he realized the importance of, uh, Kashmir as a center of learning and interviewed Kashmiris he found in Lahore and similar places, which he could access. And he refers to Hindu festivals and beliefs in terms which are *clearly* Kashmiri. So clearly, the language was not staggering along in a "Middle Indic" phase, waiting to become Kashmiri. It was *already* a fully separate language. 

So anyway, our, um, our Abhinavagupta's father has this vernacular name, Chukhala, um, which can mean "he who has four granaries" in Kashmiri, or four, um, oil seed cakes. The latter would refer to his miserliness, because oil seed cakes, you know, you press the seeds, you get some cake is left behind, which you feed to an, you feed to your animals, or in times of famine human beings are known to resort to eating it. I don't think it's very nutritious, but [it] can keep you alive for a bit longer. Um, so to call him "four, uh oil seed cakes" would be a rather rude way of referring to him, you know. Um, so "four granaries" is perhaps a bit more flattering: implies that he's quite a wealthy man, and that *is* appropriate, because we know that his ancestor was endowed by King Lalitāditya with a substantial estate, uh, *Parikalpita Bhūrisampat*, in which he, the king, settled on him substantial wealth, as well as a homestead situated on the shore of the, the bank of the Vitastā River, with a splendid view of Mount Haramuk to the north. We know that from *Tant Aloka*. 

So he says here about his father, and this is, uh, item five, at the bottom of your second page: *Yah pūrṇānanda viśrāntaḥ sarvaśāstrārtha pāragaḥ śrī chukkhala-kako diśyād iṣṭam me gurur uttamaḥ*. 

Now, I've emended the text there against the, um, *all* the manuscripts. And I, I do so, I think, for good reason. All the manuscripts read, *yah pūra pūrṇānanda viśrānta sarvaśāstrārtha pāraga* as one long compound. The only way to take that is, is essentially as *two* expressions: one is *pūrṇānanda viśrānta*, and the other is *sarvaśāstrārtha pāragaḥ*. And I cannot *believe* that any Sanskrit author would, would, would, um, compound at that point! There's absolutely no *need* to do so. It's at the c-, caesura between the two *pādas*. It's not merely unnecessary, it's *inelegant*. So I've introduced a *visarga* there. 

So: *viśrāntaḥ*, "resting", immersed in all-containing bliss, *pūrṇānanda viśrāntaḥ sarvaśāstrārtha pāragaḥ*, "who has gone to the further shore", *pāragaḥ*, "who has mastered the meaning", *artha*, the teachings of every *śāstra*, *sarvaśāstrārtha pāragaḥ*. That's not claiming he's an expert on Jainism. What mean-, what, what is meant by *sarvaśāstrārtha* is grammar, *Mīmāṃsā*, *Nyāya*, poetics, and so forth: the basic intellectual disciplines of medieval India, intellectual and cultural disciplines of medieval India. 

So, "immersed in all-embracing bliss, and master of all learned disciplines, may *chukulāka*, *chukhalāka*, the most venerable of my elders, *me gurur uttamaḥ*, grant me", *diśyād me*, "my heart's desire", *iṣṭam*, "that which I desire." So he's praying to his father, who must be deceased, I think, to be prayed to, um, that he should further his accomplishment, which is the completion of this massive work! Which he *did* accomplish, so obviously it worked! Um. 

So the term that I've translated as "elder" here is *guru*. Now, that could *also* be taken to mean "spiritual preceptor": *guru* in the sense of spiritual preceptors. You know, in Sanskrit the word *guru* can mean anyone who's your elder, your older brother, for that matter, your, your, your, your parents: anyone who's given you any religious, any, uh, ritual assistance. They also can be seen as elders requiring special respect, um. 

But the word *guru* also has another sense, of "spiritual preceptor", which is quite different. You mustn't cons-, confuse *guru* in *that* sense with *guru* in the other sense, "elders", um. 

So the possibility that he means "spiritual preceptor", um, which is, by the way, appeared in some translations of this, of this verse, is excluded by the fact that, in *all* his works, Abhinavagupta acknowledges his father only for taking on his early education in the basic Brahmanical sciences, or, in some texts, just in grammar, *vyākaraṇa*, um. 

There's no doubt that, um, *chukhalāka*, or Nara Siṃha Gupta, *was* a Śaiva. He was a disciple of,  Bhūtiraja, and therefore an initiate in the *Krama*. We, we know this. And this is, by the way, *another* argument for s-, for pushing us towards the conclusion that the, uh, commentary on the *Gītā* is an *early* work by Abhinavagupta. Because he, this same guru, initiated his father, who now, it seems, has passed on. So it looks as if it's from an early phase of his, his career. 

Yeah. Um, and we're going to look now at the evidence of, uh, in Abhinavagupta's works for the involvement of Chukhulaka in his education. Now, the long passage which I put on page three, you won't be able to read in its entirety. But, um, the first part of verse 58, which is in bold, says, *pitrā sa śabda gahanē kṛta sam praveśaḥ*. He, he's referring to himself in the third person. "He", Abhinavagupta, "I", in other words. Abhinavagupta was, um, made to be introduced, *kṛta sam praveśaḥ*, into the deep science of grammar, *śabda gahanē*. He introduced me, he led me into the abyss of grammatical science, if you like. *Gahanā* means "a cave". And of course, uh, he means here that the, the discipline is a profound one, which takes a long time to master. 

And you may think, "Oh well, it just means he learned his ABC, uh, learned the rudiments of Sanskrit grammar, never went beyond that." But in fact, he seems to have become a *great* grammarian. He wrote a commentary on the *Prākṛtārṇava* of Bhartṛhari! This is perhaps the most *difficult* of all linguistic treatises, um, and to undertake a commentary on it is really quite an achievement. And presumably, he did it as quite a young man. We, we don't have it, I'm afraid. We just *know* that he, he did compose a commentary on the *Prākṛtārṇava* of Bhartṛhari, um, it's, um, a major achievement, I imagine. Um.

So we have this, uh, passage there. But let's look at a bit of this, uh, biographical passage. It's *so* unusual. We get, um, a detailed account of *anyone's* biography in Indian sources. Most authors remain frustratingly unknown to us, except through their pronouncements. So let's have a look at this. It makes a change of tone. Starting at the beginning, I've put two verses, which are separated by some intermediate matter, which doesn't matter. So, two at the top, and then– so that's 38 and 39. And then we jump to 53 to 59. 

*Niśeṣa śāstra sadanam kila madhyadeśaḥ kila*. As we all know, *madhyadeśa* is the home of all learning. *niśeṣa śāstra sadanam kila madhyadeśaḥ*. The central part, part of north India, centering around, uh, Kaṇyakubja and similar places in the Doab, between the Ganges and the Yamunā Rivers. *Tasminnajāyata guṇābhyadhiko dvijanmā kaupīyātri gupta iti nāmani rukta gotraḥ*. In that *madhyadeśa*. In that central kingdom, that central realm was born a remarkable kaupī brāhmaṇa, *dvijanmā*, of, uh, great virtue, *guṇābhyadhiko*, superior, of great virtue, um, Atrigupta, Atrigupta. 

So he's referring to his ancestor, Atrigupta, whose *gotra* is indicated by his name, um, um, *Nāma nirukta gotra*. Whose Brahmanical lineage, ancestral lineage (going back to a ṛṣi) is explained, *nirukta*, by his name itself. He's Atrigupta of the Atri *gotra*, in other words. 

*Śāstrābdhi carvaṇa kālodyad āgasti gotraḥ*. Um, now, this is, uh, witticism, um. "But in whom the Āgasti *gotra* arises", *udyād*, "through his skill, by virtue of his skill in relishing", *carvaṇa*, "the ocean of *śāstra*", *śāstrābdhi*. Now, what is he referring to there? Āgasti. The sage Āgasti is famous for having swallowed all the water in the oceans in order to expose the Kālaya Titans and, uh, destroy them. So this is a, um, well-known myth. Āgasti drank the oceans dry. And, uh, his ancestor Atrigupta, he's praising him beyond measure for his learning. That he's like Āgasti, in that he drained dry the ocean of *śāstra*. He, he drank it all down, swallowed the lot, um. 

*Āmata lalitāditya rājā nijam puram ānāyat praṇayārambhasāt*. "As a result of his great affection", *praṇayārambhasāt*, "King Lalitāditya", the conquering king of Kashmir, Lalitāditya, who's supposed to have, uh, defeated Kaṇyakubja, "brought him to his own, um, uh, country", *puram*, here's referring to the country rather than the capital, "Nijam puram ānāyat praṇayārambhasāt* *kaśmīrākhyam*. To his own country called Kashmir, *himālaya mūrdhagaṁ*, "which rests on the summit of the Himalayas, high in the Himalayas, surrounded by mountains. 

*Adi vasati yad gauri kāntā karaira vijayādibhiḥ*. Which the beloved of Gauri, which Śiva, Maheśvara, *ādivasati*, "occupies, in which He dwells", through his emanations– *karā* means "rays", through his emanations, beginning with Vijayā. Vijayā stands here for Vijayēśvara or Vijayēśvara or Vijābatāraka, who *is* the principal Śiva of the Kashmir Valley. Uh, at, um, Vijayēśvara, um, Bijbihār in Kashmiri– Bijbehara, in a horrible Punjabized version of the, of the name, I'm afraid. The toponyms of Kashmir have been *horribly* distorted by, uh, the rule of the Sikhs and the Dogras, who substituted various bastardized, semi-Punjabized forms of the names, which are just *still* used in official documents, even though no Kashmiri uses them! So, Bijbehara instead of Bijbihār! Only the Mughal period documents reproduce fairly correctly the Kashmiri pronunciations of these names. So you look at Abu’l Fazl, for example, you will see Bijbrār, which is pretty much correct. That stands for, um, Bijbror. Kashmiri is, has a very *odd* vowel system. It's a bit difficult to transcribe it consistently, um, but the early, uh, Mughal period authors do so pretty effectively. 

Yes, so, which Śiva occupies with his emanations, beginning with Vijayā. *Yugapad akhilam bhogā sāraṁ rasād paricarvitum*. This is an emendation from *paricarjitum*, which yields no meaning. Um, out of eagerness, *rasāt*, to relish fully, *paricarvitum*, the flood of enjoyments, um, which Kashmir has to offer. In other words, "Simultaneously", *yugapad*, *akhilam*, he wish-, as though it's a, it's a fine poetic conceit: He occupies the, the Valley of Kashmir with countless emanations, beginning with Vijā, as though He were eager, simultaneously, to enjoy the flood of pleasures that is offered by this wonderful, um, Happy Valley of, of Kashmir, um. 

Let me just pause for a moment to say, Abhinavagupta, Abhinavagupta, um, 

[Śrīcandra-]  
[cudā-]  
[caranā-]  
[bja-]  
[parāga-]  
[gupta]. 

His son was he who is well-known as Abhinavagupta. He's referring to himself in the third person, a bit like Trump, but rather different case, for different motivations, I think. 

So, his son was this person, well-known under the name [COMPLETED] Abhinavagupta, *śrī Candracūḍācāraṇārjava°parāga° paputā*, "who has been purified", *pūtā*, "by the pollen", *parāga*, "from the lotuses that are the feet of Lord Śiva. He who has the crest of the moon upon his head."

*Mātā vyā° vyāyū° yujyadāmum kilā bālye eva kila*. He has been told, it has been said, he doesn't know this from, from, from, from personal experience. It has been said, *kila*, that his mother separated him from her when he was just a baby, *bālya eva*, when he was just an infant. In other words, the *kila* indicates that this happened before the age of, of the onset of childhood amnesia. So he learned from his family that he'd lost his mother, if not in childbirth, because he had a younger brother who came along later, of course. Um, but early on in his life, when he was still perhaps a toddler, his, his mother died. "So, my mother separated herself, him, himself, *him*, from her, when he was just a child, I am told", *kila*. 

*Daivam hi bhāvi° parikarmaṇi saṁskarotī*. "For, fate takes, plays a, plays a hand, takes a part, *saṁskarotī*, in the preparation of the future." *Bhāvi°parikarma° ṇi saṁskarotī*. So, he's looking at it positively. "Okay. I lost my mother as a child, but that stimulated me in a certain spiritual direction the rest of my life."

*Mātā paraṁ bandhur iti pravā° daḥ*. "The saying goes", *iti pravādaḥ*, "that 'mother, above all, is kin.'" She's the, the *ultimate* kin, you know, to whom you are deeply bound by attachment and so forth. *Sneho 'ti°gāḍhaṁ kurute hi pāśān*. "For, love", maternal love, the love of one's mother, *sneho*, "makes the bonds of the soul", *pāśān*, "the bonds, extremely hard to break." *Atigāḍhaṁ kurute hi pāśān.* So, that love between mother and son holds you in the world and prevents you from, detaching yourself from the world completely. Um. 

*Tan mūlabandhe gal° ite kilāsya manye sthitā jīvita eva muktiḥ*. "In my view", *manye*, "when that, when the bondage", *bandhe*, "rooted in her", *tanmūlaban° dhe*, "has dissolved", *gal° ite*, "then, for him", Abhinavagupta, "in my view", *manye*, "liberation was established, of him, in life itself", of him actually living. So, so, he's saying, "by the loss of my mother, tragic though it was, I was freed of this root connection, this radical connection of affection, and that enabled me to, to, to move on to liberation in life itself, because I didn't have the mother holding me back." So, it's a somewhat *negative* view of maternal love. Anyway, that's what he's saying. 

Then, *Pitrā sa śab° dagahanai°kṛtas tasya saṁpraveśaḥ*. He was then introduced to the study of grammar, Pāṇini, and the texts of Jesus, studying Bhartṛhari, it seems. Uh, by his father. 

*Tarkagha° ṭanāvamarmi°priṣṭatā mala°pūtā cittaḥ*. And his mind was purified of all taint, *malaḥ*, "by the spray from the waves of the ocean of philosophical reasoning". So he was introduced first to grammar, and then *tarka*, namely *nyāya* and, and the science of reasoning, and so forth. This is the basic trivium of Kashmiri in medieval education: grammar, *tarka*, and *sāhitya*, uh, belles, artistic writing. Um. 

*Sāhitya°sāndra°rasabhogā° parāmaheśa°bhaktyā svayaṁgraha° ṇadurmada°yāgr̥hī° tā*. "And, while he was intent upon relishing the flavor, the moist flavors of literature, the, the delicious flavors of literary writing–" He moved on from grammar and logic to aesthetic, to aesthetic writing. But he was immersed in the appreciation of literature. "–He was suddenly seized", *gr̥hītā*, "by devotion to Śiva", *maheśa°bhaktyā*, "a devotion which was *svayaṁgraha° ṇadurmada°yā*, "which was characterized by a madness that insisted upon seizing him of its own accord." He had no say in the matter. Just suddenly, he was swamped by devotion to Śiva. He didn't *think* that "would be quite nice to get to know Śiva". He was just *suddenly*, this emotion overpowered him. 

Um, and then, *sa tanmayībhū° ya nalokavartanā° m ajīga° ṇat kāmapi kevalam punas tadīyasaṁbhogavivr̥d°yai pu° rā karoti tā°syaṁ guru° veśmasu svayam*. "Having become one with that, having immersed himself in that flood of devotion to Śiva", *tanmayībhū*, "having become one with that, he gave no value to the way of the world thereafter." *Nalokavartanā° m ajīga° ṇat*. Uh, *aras*, duplicated *aras gaṇayāmi*, "I count", or, "I value." He no longer valued the ways of the world. Time to get married, find a bride, have children, et cetera, et cetera. "Only, but only", *kevalamapī tadīyasaṁbhogavivr̥d°ye*, "in order to intensify his experience of that", that, uh, *bhakti*,  "he became", *purā karoti dāsam*. He made slavery. "He made himself a slave", freely, *svayam*, of his own free accord, "in the homes of teachers", *guruveśma° su*. 

And after that, he goes on to mention the *Ātmārthasamata* and the other *samatās*. So, I'm sorry. That took rather a long time, but I thought it might be interesting to read that because it's not– you don't get *too* much of that in Sanskrit literature. You actually get to feel Abhinavagupta's presence, somehow, through reading that. You get some sense that there's a *person* there. He's not just a kind of *śāstric* robot, he, you know, he's following along certain preordained lines. He, he has a human being, living a life, um, and expressing himself. 

Yes. Um, then the only thing that I was going to discuss after that, and I, I, I don't have the *time* to do so, was, um, how far this education went. And I'm of the opinion that, although he mentions only grammar here, in other part– in other works, he acknowledges his father for having given him a body and the sciences, plural, *dehavidyābhiḥ*. And, um, I think, therefore, what he means is, the basic disciplines of Brahmanical learning. He didn't teach him Śaivism. Well, they had the same guru, but, he, it was *he* that trained him in these basic disciplines. And these basic disciplines severed his interest in mundane life. He became convinced that he was going to be a scholar for the rest of his life and had no illusions that *that* was consistent with being a married man. And he says, elsewhere, in his works, that once he'd shown this complete commitment to learning, no one mentioned these things again. No one said, "You're going to–", you know. "His mother had died", so *she* wasn't there to nag him about having children. "Get married! Are you *never* going to marry? Are you *never* going to have–" "Am I going to die without grandchildren?" Um, so he, he never had that pressure thereafter. Um, was able to pursue his life of learning and spirituality unhindered, and, presumably, supported by a regular income from his ancestral holding on the bank of the, of the Vitasta. 

Well, though, when it came to re-, writing the *Tantrāloka*, apparently that wasn't quiet enough. So, one of his patrons, obviously with royal connections or ministerial connections, arranged for him to move to a house where there were, in an area where there were only Śaivas. Who said, "Don't make any noise! The great Abhinavagupta is working on, on the *Tantrā°loka*." So, he was able to work in peace, in this house put at his disposal, in, I suspect, Vijayeshvara, the town of Vijayeshvara, which was the Śaiva town. And, I think maybe advertisements for rentals probably said, "Vaiṣṇavas and Buddhists need not apply." Yeah, I don't know for sure, of course. 

Anyway, let's stop there. [COMPLETED]
