Well, I'm absolutely delighted once again to welcome Professor Sanderson back to give his, uh, third lecture in this series for this term anyway. I mean, he's done many others on, on this, on the Tantric last time, um, and he's carrying on with the Abhinavagupta's *Tantrāloka*, uh. So, Professor Sanderson, thank you. 

You. Well, last week we read a potentially rather boring verse on his father, but I think it has a lot of interest in it. Although his father was not one of his, uh, religious preceptors, he introduced him, as we saw, to the elements of Brahmanical education. And if I'd had more time I'd have elaborated that theme and shown that he actually produced a number of, of treatises in the various basic Brahmanical disciplines which, unfortunately, have not survived: in Vaiśeṣika and particularly in grammar. Perhaps I mentioned his *Prakīrṇaka* commentary, unfortunately lost, on the fantastically difficult, um, *Prakīrṇaka* chapter of Bhartṛhari's *Vākyapadīya*. That, unfortunately, we don't have. But anyway, it's quite clear that he wasn't just a person who passed his O levels, as it were, his GCSE, you know, he, he did advanced study in all these disciplines before he moved on to Śaiva education. And this is something to be borne in mind with the Śaiva tradition of Kashmir. It's post-doctoral, as it were. The texts, both Siddhāntika and non-Siddhāntika, make it very clear that you must first be thoroughly trained in, um, the sciences of, of grammar, hermeneutics and reasoning, and then it seems to be in the convention, also in Kāvya, you needed to have an advanced understanding of fine writing, an ability to appreciate poetry, and *then* comes along, then comes emotion in the Śaiva tradition. So, it's a kind of luxury extra in Brahmanical education, rather than a choice early on in, in the career. You must first be fully trained in the Brahmanical tradition and *then* be immersed in the Śaiva. 

And this, is, this relationship reflects the Śaiva's view of their relationship to Brahmanical learning and Brahmanical society, that while on one level they challenge notions such as caste, on another, the idea is that they must fit in with the institutions of Brahmanical society, um, while transcending them, as it were, internally, either mentally alone or else in the privacy of sectarian practice, which is not visible to the outside world. So for example, um, when it comes to, uh, any feast that is held among initiates, they must be arranged in initiatory order, not in the order of caste, whereas in the Siddhāntika Śaiva system, caste distinctions are maintained in the rows of diners. So, Brahman row, Kshatriya row, etc. But according to the, the *śākta*-oriented Śaiva traditions, that is a sin. Uh, you must not observe, uh, birth caste in any social interactions within the community of initiates. So there's a kind of view that the Brahma-, there's a view that the Brahmanical system takes you so far, but not to liberation. But nonetheless, you must act within it as far as the outside world is concerned. You must marry your daughters in caste and so forth. I think there was no attempt to subvert, um, the, uh, the state-maintained *varṇāśrama* व्यवस्था, clear distinction between foreigners and, uh, intellec- and, uh, um, religious disciplines. Um, nonetheless it's, it's striking that in the works of Abhinavagupta there's almost no reference to his caste or his traditional Brahmanical identity. A few incidental remarks are made, but it seems to be a literary convention among these non-dual Śaivas that although they're obviously Brahmans, and there are one or two indications that they are, they don't refer to the fact. They don't go out of their way to say, "I am a Brahman of this *gotra*, following this Veda and having performed these Vedic sacrifices", which is the way Brahmans normally identify themselves or are identified in inscriptions, for example, um, where land grants are being made. That's what's relevant: your caste, your *gotra*, your three *pravaras* or five *pravaras*, your, your, your, your supposed ancestors and so forth, and your learning, uh, and ritual competence in various disciplines. So if you've sponsored a *soma* sacrifice, you're going to be called Agniṣṭoma Yājī, um, that's part of your identity. It's like a title that you carry. 

So, these Kashmiri, in Śaivas, on the whole, um, are not eager to parade their Vedic credentials, shall we say. Unlike South Indian, uh, Śaiva teachers in the Siddhāntika tradition, who very frequently do proclaim their, the fact that they've performed a *soma* sacrifice and so forth. There's a much bigger emphasis on not merely not rocking the boat, but actually being thoroughly qualified, not merely in living within caste, but also in performing even Śrauta rituals. So, there, being a Śaiva is a most exhausting business, because you've got to satisfy the full requirements of Śrauta Brahmanism and in addition take on the, the obligations of being a Śaiva. And this is a role that is not compatible with normal domestic life, I imagine. This is really restricted to the landed gentry or to priests who have no function other than the performance of religion. 

But let me get on with my main subject now. Um, we're coming to verse 13, in which finally Abhinavagupta acknowledges his principal teacher in the *kula-prakriyā*, the Kaula level of the Trika, which is the subject of this, uh, treatise that he's beginning. And he says here, "*jayatā jagaduddhṛti-kṣamo 'sau bhagavatyā saha śambhunātha ekaḥ / yaduddhīrita-śāsanāṁśu-bhīr me prakato 'yaṁ gahano 'pi śāstra-mārgaḥ*". 

*Trayodā*. This is a precative: may he be supreme. Uh, I think I pointed out in an earlier lecture that the word, the, the verb *ji* to conquer is fre-, or sorry, the verb *ji* is regularly mistranslated in these contexts as conquer. It means be supreme, not conquer. It's, it's an intransitive verb in this usage. There are two *jis* in the *Dhatupāṭha*: *ji* jaye, which is *akarmaka*, intransitive with no object, and *sakarmaka*, *ji* *abhibhave*,  *ji* to overpower. That's conquer in the normal sense, but if you look at our translations of Kāvya or say Subhāṣita collections, where there are many, uh, um, um, benedictory verses gathered, you will see them regularly mistrans-, you will see this regularly mistranslated as, "May he conquer", or, or "Śiva conquers", or "Gaṇeśa conquers" and so forth. It means *sarvotkarṣeṇa vartate*, he is supreme, or *sarvotkṛṣṭo bhavati*. It's simply an assertion of supremacy. And if the precative is used as here as a prayer, "May he be supreme", then, uh, it, it applies, of course, to *guru*s easily enough: "May this *guru* be supreme. May he be recognized as the ultimate authority". When relied, when replied to deities, uh, you may say, "Well how can you pray that a deity will be supreme? Surely the deity is automatically supreme". Um, the idea would then be, "May he be recognized as supreme by all. May he, may he, uh, be sovereign", in the sense, "May all recognize his supremacy". And we see glosses on, on this on those lines. 

So, I pray that Śambhunātha, in the second *pāda*, *śambhunātha ekaha*, my, uh, unprecedented, unequaled *guru*. *eka*, unequaled. *asau*, the, it means that, the, obviously it doesn't just mean that, it means that exceptional one. *asau* is often used in the sense of *apūrva* or *alaukika*, out of your, or *lokottara*, for example. Various glosses are used. The same thing applies to *kaścit*. This is also used frequently by these authors in a devotional context to mean exceptional, *apūrva*, unprecedented. So I pray that Śambhunātha, *asau eka* Śambhunātha, my unprecedented, unequal *guru*, I pray that he may reign supreme, *jayatāt*, *bhagavatyā saha*, together with *bhagavatī*. *Bhagavatī* is the name of his consort. And the term for this consort is, is not Mrs. Śambhunātha. This is, um, a strange category which we don't fully understand of a Tantric consort, uh, known to the Kaulas under the, under surprising term *dūtī*, or female messenger, or go-between. In Kāvya, a *dūtī* is a woman who acts as a go-between between, uh, two lovers or trying to arrange a rendezvous between two would-be lovers. So for some reason, the Tantric consort has been given this title, *dūtī*, sometimes with a long *ī*, sometimes with a short *i*. Perhaps the idea is, although I've never seen this explained in any text, that she acts as a kind of intermediary between the practitioner and the goddess. She's like the intermediary, the, the carrier of the message from one to the other. 

So this is, uh, unexpected. Generally speaking, *guru*s are venerated in their own right, independently of any other relationship they may have. But this is a special case, because this is the Kaula *guru*. So he's venerating Śambhunātha together with Bhagavatī, um, *yaduddhīrita-śāsanāṁśu-bhīr me prakato 'yaṁ gahano 'pi śāstra-mārgaḥ*. Literally, "Through the rays of the teaching", *śāsanā* teaching, *aṁśu* ray, "Through the rays of the teaching, the sunbeams of the teaching uttered by whom", *yaduddhīrita*, "By whom", I, "by Śambhunātha, *ayaṁ śāstra-mārgaḥ*. This path of scripture", I, "the Śaiva canon, with its Kaula focus in this case, this, uh, path of *śāstra*, *gahano 'pi*, though impenetrably deep, although almost impossible to plumb the depths of, it's so profound, so difficult" and so forth, "*gahanopi*, although so profound, has been made *prakata*, manifest or clear". So, he's praying to Śambhunātha, um, praying for the, um, uh, the *jaya*, the supremacy of this *guru* and his consort, who together with her, has revealed to him and clarified this otherwise obscure and profound teaching, um, in the, in the Kaula, uh, revelation, or in the Shaiva revelation culminating in the Kaula revelation. Yeah. 

So, I've translated that little freely in my, in the note that you have in the handout that I have: "I pray that Shambhunātha, my unprecedented, unequaled Guru, may reign supreme with his consort Bhagavatī, for it is he, possessing as he does the power to liberate all beings" – *jagat-uddhṛti-kṣamaḥ*, being able to lift up, rescue all beings, *jagat*. Um, "possessing as he does the power to liberate all beings, that has fully illuminated with the light beams of his teaching this path, this path to liberation taught in Shiva's scriptures, hard to penetrate though it is". 

Now I'll spend the rest of the lecture commenting on, on, on this verse and various things that arise from it. Now, the first thing there you see under the heading, "No *kula-prakriyā* without a Dūtī". Those without Dūtīs may leave. They've been given a trigger warning. If there's anyone who's going to be triggered by this, they should leave at this point. But I'm not going to go into any details. Uh, this is being recorded after all, and this is a *rahasya-śāstra*. So, the first, uh, point I want to make is a citation there from Jayaratha's commentary on, um, uh, *Tantrāloka*: "*Kula-prakriyāyām iha dūtī-mantrareṇa kvacid api karmani nā adhikāra iti* / *Ataḥ tat-sahabhāva-upa-nibandhaḥ*". *tat-sahabhāva-upa-nibandhaḥ*. He's pressing reason for, he said, "Why is he said this? Why does he mention Bhagavatī?" The reason is "*Kula-prakriyāyām dūtī-mantrareṇa kvacid api karmani nā adhikāra*". *na adhikāra*. *nāsti adhikāra*. "There is no qualification in any ritual", *kvacid api karmani*. *kasminścid api karmani*. "In the Kula system", *kula-prakriyām*, *dūtī-antareṇa*, "without the Dūtī". He's making it quite clear. Forget proceeding in the Kaula path without a Dūtī. Um, "*Ataḥ tat-sahabhāvopa-nibandhaḥ*". Therefore there is, there is the *upa-nibandhaḥ*, the mention of his being accompanied by her, *tat-sahabhāva*, his being with, *sahabhāva*, her, *tat*. Yeah. 

Now, the next citation you have, number two, um, comes from the *Tantrāloka-viveka* on the 29th chapter, which is a chapter devoted to the specifics of the Kaula, the *kula-prakriyā*. Um, and they, the question of, um, the necessity, A, of external ritual and, B, of a, of a Dūtī, of doing that external ritual with the, the assistance of a Dūtī, of a, a female consort is taken up. And this, of course, is a crucial issue, and you can imagine it is one that was quite controversial. Almost inevitably, they're going to be those who say, "Yes, yes, it can be done externally, but ultimately it's the internal process that matters, so you can forget about the external Dūtī". Uh, there would obviously be a tendency to split in this way between those who insisted on external practice with the Dūtī in spite of its socially challenging nature and those who said, "No, it, it's not necessary". 

We have a similar, um, uh, bifurcation going on in esoteric Buddhism between, uh, Vajrayānists, um, in the Yoginī Tantras, who say, "No, there *must* be the sexual elements in the ritual", uh, and those who say, "Yes, there *must*, unless the religion is not well enough established in that reason for that, for the law to turn a blind eye. If this is going to bring the religion into disrepute, then don't do it". And then there are those say, "Never do it. It's just internal". So, in the initiation, the Guru shows you, um, a card with a picture of a Dūtī on it, rather than in giving you the Dūtī in the ritual. Uh, we can go, we could go into the details, but no need to. I just want to point out that the, the requirement that the practice occur with a female consort who is not your wife, by the way, is obviously a socially highly challenging one. And one would expect there to be divergent views. 

My own experience in Kashmir was, it was something that the ancestors did, or your Guru's Guru. No one actually said, "Yes, yeah, that's quite right. Um, and by the way, John, or Lakṣmīnārāyaṇa, you're now at the stage in which you can practice like that. Who would you like to practice with?" This didn't arise, as far as I can see. It was an ideal thing which was projected back into the past, at least in the 20th century that I, I experience. No doubt there are other communities where external practice was still vital, but not I think in Kashmir at that time. So that is an indication of how, uh, the gnostic trend has taken over from the ritual and subordinated it, subordinated it. Um, recognized it. Did my teacher in Kashmir didn't deny these sexual practices, but he didn't insist on them. It was not something that was, say, "Oh, you must prepare for this, this is what you're aiming at". I think that had been largely bypassed in, in practice. 

So, this is the passage I want to look at now: "*Bāhya-caryā-vihīnasya duṣprāpa-kauliko-vidhiḥ*". The Kaula way, the Kaula practice, *kauliko-vidhiḥ*, "is virtually impossible to achieve", *duṣprāpa*, literally "difficult to be achieved". Uh, but *duṣ* here means *aśakyapraya*, virtually impossible, come impossible. Very often, *duṣ* followed by such a form means actually impossible to accomplish, not actually difficult, but simply impossible. So, the Kaula procedure is virtually impossible to accomplish, *bāhya-caryā-vihīnasya*, "for, for a person who is devoid of", *vihīnasya*, "who lacks *bāhya-caryā*", *bāhya-caryā*, "external observance, external practice". Don't think you can just internalize it all and achieve the same goal. There *has* to be this external practice as well, according to this source. "*Ityādi-yuktyā bāhya-caryāyātavāvaśya-bhāvyaṁ*". Uh, um, "by the principle, by the statement, by such statements", *ityādi-yuktyā*, "as that, that I've just translated, we have to understand that external practice is most certainly, as we can all agree on the basis of such texts, unavoidable", *avaśya-bhāvya*. It *has* to be undertaken. It's compulsory. It's not an option. 

"*Tatrapi ca dūtīṃ*". *dūtīṃ-antareṇa na kācit sampattiḥ*. And there is no accomplishing of that, no perfecting of that, that ritual, external ritual, um, uh, "in that case also, in that, um, external practice, there's no, in that external practice", *tatrapi*, "even in that", or "in that also, there can be no perfection, no success", *sampatti*, "without the Dūtī". So in practice, I should add here, on the base of *Tantrāloka* 29, you don't *have* to practice with the Dūtī every time you worship. Um, it's only necessary to do it on certain occasions. You can do it every time if you can, but he's not prohibiting that, but there's no absolute requirement. So, there are also, um, other ways of doing the *śakti-pūjā*, the worship of the Goddess as embodied in the female, mentally, in the breath and various other ways. But on part of the days, the female *must* be there. You can't avoid it altogether and still call yourself a Kaula. 

Um, so, "*Ityāha bāhya-sthāyā-śaktyā-sākaṃ iti*". That is why Abhinavagupta has said, in the verse on which this commentator is commenting, um, "with a consort", a *śakti*, "who is *bāhya-sthāyā*, with an external consort". Um, "Therefore it has been stated in scripture". *Tad uktaṃ*. "For that reason", *tat* means *tasmāt*. "Therefore it has been stated in scripture: *Kartavya-sarvato dūtīḥ dūtī-hīno na sidhyati*". Therefore you must make a Dūtī. So, a woman must be appointed as your Dūtī, as your, um, as your consort, or Dūtī. Notice here the short *i*. It can be either *dūtīḥ* or *dūtī*. Um, "a person who lacks the Dūtī cannot achieve success", *na sidhyati*. *bhavet*. There's plenty of strong scriptural support for this position. 

And also, "*iti tataḥ* / *brāhmaṇasya yatā patnī yayā saha yajet make*". Just as for a Brahmin, *brāhmaṇasya*, there is, uh, there must be a wife, *patnī*, with whom he can worship in Vedic sacrifice, "*Evaṃ dūtī kulācārya-geya nityoditay kule*". So, in the eternally active Kula – this is a just a conventional, uh, epithet – "so, in this, um, ever active, supreme Kula", *nityoditay kule*, "know that there is likewise", *evaṃ*, "a Dūtī for the *kulācārya*". The master of the Kula, the Kula teacher, the Kula Guru *must* have a Dūtī. Otherwise he has no *adhikāra*. Um, so I, I don't need to translate it again, but you can read my, um, more considered translation in your own time. 

Now, what kind of connection is it with the Dūtī? I, I wish we had some sociological evidence, or *more* sociological evidence, about the nature of this relationship. Um, but apparently you can't just dump her on a whim. You don't just find a female and then dump her. The, the next passage indicates that this is a permanent, a long, at least long-term commitment, and to abandon her, to move off to another requires a penance. Frankly, the penance is not *that* exacting. So, I don't think it would be entirely impossible to change Dūtīs, um, we'll see. Um, "*Dūtīṃ tyaktvā na cānyatra gacchet kāma-vimohitaḥ*". That could be interpreted too. He should not go elsewhere, and the root *gam*, uh, to go. *gam* is often used in a sexual sense. "He should not have congress elsewhere, abandoning the Dūtī", *dūtīm*. *dūtīṃ tyaktvā*. "Deluded by lust", *kāma-vimohitaḥ*. And I said that could also be interpreted. 

Now, um, he, 12:00 Shastras, the five streams of the Shastras. Now, this term *Panchasrota* is a little unusual here. Um, this is normally applied to the five streams of *prana*, but here it's referring to the five streams of teaching, *Panchasrota Shastraya Shastre*, which would seem to be the five branches of the Tantric path: the Kaula, Mishra, Samaya, etc.. So, this is probably referring to the five *Amnayas*, rather than the five *prana* currents, even though *srota* normally means a current of *prana*. So, dwelling in the sacred site that is the seat of the goddess in the Deccan, an authoritative author on the scriptures comprising the five streams, i.e., the Kaula Shastras, a great expounder of the path, the way, *marga vibhava*, that's the path to enlightenment, *marga vibhava*, who is acclaimed in the world, *loke prasiddha*, by all good people, *Sadbhuta*, by the Buddhists, by the Jainas, and so on, *Sadbhuta*. In his lineage, there arose, *Tasya eva shishya agreni*, the foremost of his disciples, Shriman Shambhu, who became famous, *Iti prasiddhi magamat*, having come from Jalandhara Pitha. So, from that southern Pitha, there arose this great teacher, Shriman Shambhu, who went to Jalandhara Pitha and there became famous. 

Um, so, Kashmir Shaivism comes 12:59 from the Deccan via Jalandhara. Yeah. 

And that is the end of this talk. [COMPLETED] The *Mantramārga*, rather the *Mantra-Mārga*, the, uh, the system of the five streams: the Siddhānta, the Dakṣiṇa, the Vāma, the Bāulika and the Gāruḍika, the five elements of the, um, the conventional numeration of the *Mantra-Mārga*.  

*Sātimārga vibhava*, together with the glory, *vibhava*, of the Ātimārga. Now, the Ātimārga here does not mean the Pāśupata and related traditions. That's another and common meaning of Ātimārga, the original meaning. Um, but it was because it became associated with the Kāpālika tradition as well, Ātimārga. It was then transferred to the Kāula tradition. So, Ātimārga in this context means the Kulaśāstra, not the, uh, pre-Tantric, uh, Ātimārga. So, he's saying he, he was a, an authoritative author on the scriptures of the five streams together with the majestic Ātimārga.  

He was succeeded by Sumati. That same Guru's illustrious chief disciple, Śambhunātha by name, achieved exceptional spiritual attainment, *prasiddhim āgamat*, from the Pīṭhajālandhara. From the sacred site of the goddess in Kāṅgrā. 

Now, evidence of the Trika in the Deccan, then, the Kāula Trika. The first evidence I've mentioned elsewhere in my, in my publications. Um, and, and that is that we have clear evidence in the scriptures of the Paścimāmnāya, the cult of Kubjikā, that the basic texts of that tradition were composed in the Deccan and in the Konkan coastal strip. And these texts, the *Kubjikāmata*, the *Kubjikāmnāya* and related works, um, the, uh, *Mṛtyuñjaya Bhairava*, etcetera, are deeply dependent upon the scriptures of the Trika. You could say, if I'm maybe allowed to caricature roughly, the Kubjikā corpus is the Trika plus. It's that they've taken materials from the Trika scriptures and added in the cult of Kubjikā. It's very closely related to the Trika, and in fact the Paścimāmnāya says that the Trika Kāula, the Kāula tradition of the Trika, which it calls the Purvāmnāya, is the mere *image* of the Paścimāmnāya and arose from it. Historically speaking, it's the other way round. The Paścimāmnāya arose from the Purvāmnāya. But naturally, they're not going to allow themselves to be considered secondary. So they invert the, the relationship. So that's the first evidence. 

What about, um, um, uh, textual references? Well, you will see that in number seven, I've given a passage, or two passages, seven and eight, from the *Yaśastilaka*, which is a, uh, a wonderful prose poem by Somadevasūri, a very learned Jain scholar and poet, um, working in Āndhra in the 10th century. And there are two passages in this, this extraordinary work which refer to the Trika. And here's the first one: *Tasyā sakala janāsā dāraṇēpi svadehē trikamata dīkṣitasēva devabhūyēna abhiniviśamānasyā kati cit saṃvatsarā vyatī cakramuḥ*. Uh, I've shortened the citation so you can see what the main part is. It's a narrative. He's talking about a certain wicked prince called Māridadatta, who's coming to no good, he'll get his comeuppance in due course. One of the problems is that he has delusions about himself which make him resemble an initiate in the Trika. So, this is what the text says: "Several years passed for this wicked Prince Māri-, Māridadatta, who lived like an initiate in the Trika, fully believing in his own body as a god, although it was no different from anybody else's." Very Jain remark. 

And then the next one, even more explicit: *Kulācāryakāḥ sarvēṣu pēyāpēya bhakṣyābhakṣyādiṣu niśaṅka citratā vṛtāditi kulācāryakāḥ*. The *kulācāryakāḥ*, the function of that suffix *ka* is that these are considered vile. The vile *kulācārya*s, *kulācāryakāḥ*. And of course this is a Jain assessment of the, of the Kāulas. Of course, the vile, "Those vile *kulācārya*s maintained that one is liberated" – that has to be supplied from the context, a couple of pages back, it's a very long prose poem – um, "the, the vile *kulācārya*s maintain that one is liberated by practice", um, *vṛtāt*, "in which the mind is free of inhibition", *niśaṅkacittāt*, it's a *bahuvrihi*. "In which the mind is free of inhibition, *niśaṅka*, in such matters as the distinction between permitted and forbidden foods and drinks". *pēyāpēya bhakṣyābhakṣyādiṣu niśaṅkacittāt vṛtāt*. For the Trika doctrine teaches that one should propitiate Sarvānīśvara, Arddhanārīśvara. "Sarvānīśvara at night with one's mouth fragrant with wine, with one's heart tranquil from the taste of meat, adopting the Śakti seal" – that's a special *mudrā*, posture, and *yoga* posture – "with one's consort positioned beside one to the left, assuming in this way the likeness of Śiva in his Umāmahēśvara form". Uh, Umāmahēśvara is Śiva with the Devi seated on his left thigh. In Eastern India, rather charming detail not seen elsewhere is that he has his hand to her chin, affectionately touching her chin. You don't see that outside Bengal and, uh, Magadha generally. 

"So, we are referring here to, uh, a loving couple worshipping at night with the consumption of, of, of wine and meat, and this way we get the three *Makāras*, the three M's". The early tradition has three M's, not five. Later on, the Śāktas added two more as if they desperately wanted to fill the number up to five. What else begins with M? Uh, fish, *matsya*. Can you think of anything else? Well, not really. Um, how about *Mudrā*? But *Mudrā* is not a substance. Well, we're going to make, we're going to call parched grain *mudrā* from now on. So, it's clear it's rather artificial attempt to make up the number. The early sources speak of three M's. And they are *maithunam*, sexual intercourse, *madyam*, intoxicating liquor, liquor, and *māṃsa*, meat.  

Now, someone who has studied the Trika from the *Tantrāloka*, the *Siddhayogeśvarīmata*, the *Malinivijayottara*, the main available texts in this tradition, will say, "He's got it wrong. Somadevasūri has got it wrong. The Trika does not venerate Arddhanārīśvara", because the text says Sarvānīśvara, which is there in your text, uh, is a, is a periphrasis or rather a synonym of Arddhanārīśvara, that form of Śiva in which he's taken the goddess into himself to form the left half of his body. So, they're divided down the central axis: female on the left, male on the right. So, he's claiming that the Trika is worshipping this form of Śiva. And you can immediately raise an objection: no reference to that in *Tantrāloka* or in *Malinivijayottara*. So, he obviously is not really very well-informed. 

Now, I think one thing you can always assume with, with the Indian Kāvya authors: they get their facts right. It's considered a terrible blemish to get your facts wrong. Of course there are certain cultural errors, such as the belief in king bees as opposed to queen bees, you know, there are cultural mistakes. But errors of fact, um, of generally accepted fact, or not acceptable, and poets usually go to great lengths to avoid them. So, you don't talk about people worshipping Arddhanārīśvara unless you have evidence that they do. And that, that is the case. 

And in the next passages, um, um, under the heading, "The Cult of Arddhanārīśvara in the Trika's Tantrasadbhāva", you see this evidence. The *Tantrasadbhāva*, um, survives in two early palm leaf manuscripts in the Kānmandu Valley and a couple of epigraphs of those manuscripts. Very well-preserved text, in fact. And, um, this work is one of the major contributors to the Paścimāmnāya corpus, incidentally. So, it was very big in the Deccan as well, evidently. And, um, these passages set out the worship of Arddhanārīśvara in the Trika. Or rather they set out the worship of Trika deities visualized in Arddhanārīśvara form. Uh, in this case, the two alphabet deities, male and female, forming a fused body. And to save time I'm, I'm not going to read through those passages. You can do that in your own time, I've edited them for you, um, and, uh, translated them. I hope accurately. Um, and what you see from that is that this is a central concept in the ordinary, in the *Tantrasadbhāva* tradition of the Trika. Um, that tradition I've shown to be very much a major contributor to the Paścimāmnāya literature which was developing in the Deccan in the wake of this Trika tradition. So, it looks as though Somadevasūri is basing his evidence upon this tradition which we see in the *Tantrasadbhāva*, not the *Malinivijayottara* or the *Triśirobhairava* or other Trika sources. Which might in, which leads me to just point out to you that the Trika is not monolithic. There are a number of texts which are, are, are related to each other, which later tradition defines as Trika scriptures. They didn't necessarily use the term Trika, but they worship the same goddesses, or very closely related cluster of goddesses, and so later on a corpus is defined. And the *Tantrasadbhāva* is part of that corpus. But clearly, by the 10th century already, uh, Somadeva, the learned Jain scholar Somadeva, uh, knows that this is a form of the Trika, because he uses the term *trikamatam*, the doctrine of the Trika. And this is mid-10th century, at a time before the Trika traditions seen in Abhinavagupta and his contemporaries had time to come down to the South. So, this is clearly an independent, uh, witness. It's not derived from 10th century Kashmir. It's very unlikely, I think. There's no reason to assume that.  

Um, so I won't go through all these, uh, passages because we're already up to 4:50. Um, but maybe I can just give you a taste. Let's see. And, yeah, you might enjoy reading them, because they show you, uh, something of Kāpālika-style Tantric worship. And something of the visualization of these, uh, these deities, um, who are quite ferocious. So, in this next, "I shall teach you the worship following the *ekavīra* procedure of the *Vidyāparāparā*, who resides in the left half of the body of Bhairava. One should install and worship the excellent goddess who has 40 syllables on this…" [COMPLETED] seed pod at the center of a lotus diagram, then my beloved one should worship Bhagōrī and the other seven Yōginīs on the eight petals of that diagram, in accordance with the eight units of this *vidyā*. She is to be visualized laughing, intoxicated by alcoholic liquor, her eyes rolling with drunkenness, frightening with her long fangs, with her mouth open wide, most terrifying, adorned with a garland of corpses, with vipers, scorpions and snakes as her jewelry, with her ears adorned with charming lotuses in the form of the hands of human corpse, corpses as loud as the thundering storm clouds at the aeon's end, eight-armed, truly fearsome, three-eyed, with large fangs seeming to spew forth fire, assuming any form at will, destroying the suffering of her devotees". There's a taste of Śākta visualization, of, of the earlier type, the wilder, more furious Kāpālika type, rather than nice, sweetened version of Tripurasundarī that takes over later. 

You look pleased. Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yes. 

So now, moving on to page 10 of your handout. What about Jālandhra? You remember that verse we began with? Uh, we were told that, um, the tradition had come from, Shambhunātha had come to Shambhunātha through, uh, an unnamed *guru* in the Deccan, who initiated Sumati, who initiated Shambhunātha. And, uh, Shambhunātha is said to have achieved exceptional spiritual success as a result of the favor of the Jālandhra Pīṭha, which is really almost a deity in itself, because it's a divine presence. The *Pīṭha* of the goddess *is* the presence of the goddess. So, I want to now consider, uh, a couple of passages that shed light on this, I think they shed light on this. Um, the first is 15 on your handout. 

"*Dīśu dīkṣya ca rudra-kōṇāt vāyavyāntaṁ gaṇeśvaram* / *vaṭukaṁ tri-gurūn siddān yōginī-pīṭhaṁ arcayēt*". This is in the 29th book of *Tantrālōka*. And Abhinavagupta is setting out, um, the procedure for the basic *pūjā* of the, of the, of the Kula. Starting from the northeast corner, *rudra-kōṇāt*, and descending to the northwestern, *vāyavyāntam*, "he should worship the following, along the northern side of the *maṇḍala*". That means on the left of the worshiper: "Gaṇeśa, Vaṭuka, the three *guru*s, the Siddhas, the Yōginīs and the Pīṭha". The *Pīṭha*. We want to know *which* *Pīṭha*. It's not good enough just to say "the *Pīṭha*". You can't say "Oṁ namaḥ Pīṭhāya". That wouldn't do. It *has* to be specific. So, uh, our commentator does step up and tell us the following, rather interesting, uh, rather interestingly. 

"*Pīṭham iti jālandhram* / *yatas tat-siddha-yōginī* / *kramena asyā darśanasyāvatāra*". "The Pīṭha", i.e., the *Pīṭha* to be worshiped here, that Abhinavagupta has mentioned, "is Jālandhra, because it was through its Siddhas and Yōginīs that this system came down to us." This *darśana*, this system came down to us. We used to the word *darśana* in the sense of a philosophical system. That's only one aspect of its use. Any, um, religious system can be a *darśana*. Two variants of the same ritual system can be called two separate *darśana*s. It's not restricted to metaphysics or anything like that. And that's an example of it. Um, so, "The *Pīṭha* to be worshiped here is Jālandhra, because it was through the Siddhas and Yōginīs of Jālandhra that this system has reached us." 

Now, I correlate that with the statement about Shambhunātha's connection with Jālandhra. Now, there is, um, a passage in a work called the *Niśvāsaṁcāra*, which is Trika related, which tells us that the deities of Jālandhra, the Jālandhra *Pīṭha*, are Vāmeśvara and Vāmadevī. And Vāmadevī I take to be Vāmeśvarī. It's simply metrically convenient to have Vāmadevī, uh, there. So, "In Jālandhra, the god is present, namely Vāmeśvara, Maheśvara", the Śiva called Vāmeśvara, "together, united with his consort Vāmadevī". 

Um, now, the next passage, number 18, is from an inscription which, unfortunately, has been completely destroyed in an earthquake. There was a grotesquely violent earthquake in Kangra, um, in the, um, when was it? I've forgotten the date now. But anyway, enough to have completely obliterated the inscription. Uh, no trace of it was left. An entire temple of Vajreśvī, the goddess Vajreśvī, was reduced to virtually powder. There was a huge loss of life. It was a very major Himalayan earthquake. So, uh, no possibility to go back and, uh, re-examine the inscription. 

Now, it was edited by Bühler, um, uh, a very competent Sanskritist at a time when, uh, epigraphers still, um, um, uh, published, uh, translations into English of Sanskrit inscriptions. They didn't *just* publish the inscription *without* understanding it, which is *now* the norm, I think, in Indian epigraphical study. Um, or has, has looking as though it's becoming the norm. Uh, epigraphers are absolving themselves of the need to provide a translation. Translating these things is absolutely indispensable. It's the *only* way you can test your understanding of it. It's often *only* when you do translate it that you see, "Ah, you don't fully understand it." That's my experience anyway. You can speed read and *think* you understand. But when you get down to translating you think, "Ah, that doesn't quite work. Ah, right. There's something missing here." Yeah. That's how you get into the, into the heart of the text. 

Um, so now, there is this inscription from Kangra, which was found over the door of the entry into the Jvālamukhi temple, which is a major pilgrimage center, um, in that part of the world. It's published in *Epigraphia Indica*. You've got the reference there. And, um, I have emended it, because it makes absolutely no sense, um, as edited by, um, Bühler. You'll see, in the third line there, in the smaller type face, my apparatus for this line. Um, and I am reading, "*dadyād ajñā-vajñaṁ* / *dīyam iyaṁ* / *udayas-temaṇi vajreśvarī vaḥ*". And Bühler's edition has meaninglessly "*vidyā* *vidyā* *vajñāna-vajñaṁ*", which makes no sense at all. There's no verb. It's, it's hopeless. So, I have emended that to "*dadyād ajñā-vajñaṁ* / *dīyam iyaṁ* / *udayas-temaṇi vajreśvarī vaḥ*". Now, Vajreśvī is the goddess of that temple, the principal goddess of that temple, Vajreśvī. So the verse means, "I pray that this" – i.e., this goddess Vajreśvī – "may bestow on you today faultless understanding and thereby", *udayas-temaṇ*, "lasting success". This is a, uh, part of a *praśasti* composed by, um, a certain Vedāntic Ācārya, who happened to visit Jvālamukhi, I think in the 17th century. Um, and in the opening verses of this extremely difficult *praśasti*, it's a real *tour de force*, which, uh, the, uh, the early, uh, uh, editor said, "Oh, it's *just* devotional, we won't bother to translate it. It has no historical interest." It's actually a real *conundrum*, in which is the poet is doing some very complicated *yamaka*, tri- tricks. Yeah. Uh, if you look at it, you can see "*dadyād ajñā-vajñaṁ*", echoes, sound echoes going on there. And in the opening verses, he adores the goddess under different names: Vajreśvī, Jvālamukhi and Vāmā. 

And we see that in the third, uh, in number 19, in the, um, third part of the fourth verse of this *praśasti*: "*vāmā vāmāvatād vo* / *yatī-niyatī-nīrikṣā-* / *samakṣā asamakṣā*". You see the *yamaka*, um, going on there. "I pray" – this is *avatāt* – "that the gracious", *avāmā*, "goddess Vāmā" – *avatād vo*, *avatād vaḥ* – "She who, being *asamakṣā*, beyond the range of our senses, is *samakṣā*, is perceptible". Understand, only perceptible, "only through the discipline, *niyati*, for *niyama*, and insight, *nīrikṣā*, of the ascetic, *yati*." 

Now, um, from this, uh, my analysis of, analysis of this *praśasti*, it's clear that to me that *three* goddesses are being addressed in this opening, in this, in this temple, by this visiting, uh, Brahmin. Uh, he is aware of three identities in the same temple: Vajreśvī, which we know from other, uh, liturgical materials surviving connected with Kangra, is the principal deity; Jvālamukhi, who *used* to be present in the temple but is now relocated about 20 miles away in the, in the, in the hills, a very important site for the Nāth Yōgīs, by the way; um, and this *third* goddess, we don't know from any other source, Vāmā. She doesn't appear in the later pilgrimage literature, but *does* appear in this inscription. So, it seems that our author had some access, presumably to devotional materials in this pilgrimage site, which he visited. As a distinguished Brahmin, presumably, had access to these materials, stayed there for some time, to propitiate the goddess, and learned about this Vāmā identity. 

Now, um, we heard the *Niśvāsaṁcāra*. It's very early Tantric text, telling us that the goddess in Jālandhra is Vāmadevī. And of course that's synonymous with Vāmā, or Vāmeśvarī. Those are interchangeable, uh, names. 

Now, in *Tantrālōka*, in the fourth chapter, you see there, *Tantrālōka* 4.178, item 20, we have, "*vāmeśvarīti śabdena* / *prōktā'sī niśi-sañcare*". "In the *Niśvāsaṁcāra*" – *niśi-sañcare* is a metrical variant for the sake of the meter – um, "in the *Niśvāsaṁcāra*, she", and that this means the high goddess of the Trika, you can tell that from the context, "*mātr̥-sad-bhāvā-'iliā-'sā* / *kālasaṁkarṣiṇī*", "has been called Vāmeśvarī." In other words, he's saying, "The goddess known as Vāmeśvarī in the *Niśvāsaṁcāra* is the *kālasaṁkarṣiṇī* stroke *mātr̥-sad-bhāvā* that we've been talking about in the *Tantrālōka*." Then Jayaratha steps up and cites the relevant verse from the *Niśvāsaṁcāra*, which, I'm afraid, is *not* found in our fragmentary one manuscript of the *Niśvāsaṁcāra* from Nepal. But it reads as follows. He quotes it to illustrate what Abhinavagupta is saying, to support what Abhinavagupta is saying. "*Eṣā tu **kaulikī vidyā** sarva-siddhi-pradāyikā*, sakāśād **deva-devasya** nirgatā **śakti-vartmani**, **vāmeśvaryāvatāretu** prakāśatvam upagatā*".  

"This **kaula-vidyā**, this **kaula** spell, this **kaula-mantra**, which bestows all attainments, *sarva-siddhi-pradāyikā*, came forth, *nirgatā*, from the God of Gods into the domain of his power, *śakti-vartmani*, and *then* became manifest", i.e., in the world, "in her descent, *avatāre*, as the goddess **Vāmeśvarī**". **Vāmeśvaryāvatāre**. 

I think this makes it fairly clear, if not certain, but certainly quite plausible, um, that we're looking at a cult of **Vāmeśvarī** in the *Pīṭha* of Jālandhara, which, for these people at least, was seen not merely as the cult of a local goddess, but as the cult of the Supreme Goddess manifest in a particular place, by virtue of this **kaula** connection, with this particular *sampradāya*, *siddha*, *siddha*, *yogīni*s, which Śambhunātha had tapped into by achieving his *siddhi* in that place.  

Now, somehow he got from there to Kashmir.  K. C. Pandey claimed that Abhinavagupta had gone over to, to Jālandhara for this purpose.  There's no evidence of that whatsoever, that he ever stirred from his ancestral home.  None. Well, we know he stirred from his ancestral home, okay, but never from Kashmir. This pure fantasy on K. C. Pandey's part. If you look at his biography of Abhinavagupta in his, uh, *Abhinavagupta, uh, Historical and Philosophical Study*, you will see that the biographical material is largely fantastic. He's made it up. It's not supported by any evidence in the text that I've seen, and I *think* I've seen all that he's seen and some more. There's *no* evidence at all to support his view. His idea was poetically expressed: Abhinavagupta, having exhausted the, the, the wells of learning in Kashmir, was not satisfied and so wandered beyond Kashmir, around the world, in search of deeper knowledge. There's *nothing* to support that scenario that I can see.  Anyway, would *you* leave Kashmir *or* Kangra for higher learning? I don't think so, not at this period. Kashmir was *one* of the great centers of learning at that time. Kangra, then as now, is, uh, not a major intellectual center, shall we say. It was, however, extremely wealthy. It had some very powerful temples, very *wealthy* temples, and they attracted the, the attention of Mahmūd of Ghaznī, who was raiding India and, and emptying treasuries just at this time, when Abhinavagupta was active, right on the cusp of the 10th and 11th centuries, into the early years of the 11th century. And he raided Kangra. And is said, according to the Muslim historians of the period, no doubt exaggerating wildly, to have gone off with countless elephants, slaves, gold, silver, jewellery and so forth, from the wealthy temples of, of Kangra.  So, this was *not* a good time to be in Kangra. In fact, North India at this time was highly disturbed because of these regular annual raids by Mahmūd of Ghaznī, of Ghazna rather I should say. Ghazna being the region, Ghaznī being the capital.  

And, um, I think it's very plausible that, um, Śambhunātha moved from Jālandhara to Kashmir under pressure of these events. Uh, he was *known* to be a great *siddha*, and insiders in Kashmir, as it were, raised the drawbridge to let him in. Very *few* people were allowed into Kashmir at this period. They were being extremely cagey about admitting foreigners. But I can see that a learned man like that would be an exception. Maybe had, Abhinavagupta, um, uh, spoke a right, the right word in the right ear, and so he was, as it were, given a passport for entry.  It's, uh, merely, it's merely a hypothesis, but I, I like, I can't quite resist the temptation to, to voice it for you.  

Okay, now I'll stop there.  [COMPLETED]
