Through these four *matikā*s, these four lineages, *Śrīkaṇṭa* is the teacher of all.

## Lineages of Descent: Three and a Half

Through these lines of descent, three and a half lineages came into being, and these have spread out into hundreds of branches through their disciples and the disciples of their disciples. This *Tantrāloka* exudes all the flavors of Śaivism because it has absorbed those of the essences of all six streams of revelation, for all are encompassed within these three and a half lineages.

Well, the exegesis of that statement would be, um, quite tricky and extensive. But let me just, um, point out that by the six streams of revelation he means the Siddhānta, um, Āmardaka Santana. The, um, Vāma and Dakṣiṇa, the two, uh, streams of non-primary streams of non-siddhāntika revelation. 

Uh, those teaching the cult — the Vāmasrotas, the Vāma stream teaching the cult of Tumburu and his four sisters: Jayā, Vijayā, Ajantī, and Aparājitā — or rather the cult of those four sisters with the subordinate Tumburu tagged on. He's a kind of, um, chaperone of his four sisters. It's really a cult of these four female deities. So it's a Śākta, uh, tradition for the most part.

And then on the right side we have the Dakṣiṇasrotas, which is the tradition principally of the cult of Svaccchandabhairava, a very influential cult which also influences the Siddhānta, uh, Siddhānta in certain crucial ways. 

Leaving, um, two others: the tradition of, um, the *Bhautikatantras* or *Buddhatantras*, uh, the *Tantras* of demonology, which are concerned primarily with exorcism. So clearly this pertains to rather specialized set of functions which some *ācāryas* offered — casting out spirits and so forth. And then the *Garuḍatantras*, the *Tantras* of, um, counteracting the effect of poison, uh, mainly snakebite, but they're not the only poisonous things available in the Indian environment. So other kinds of bites are also mentioned. 

Um, so you might say that these two are in a sense tagged onto the edge. They're not relevant primarily from the sociological point of view, but they're nonetheless part of the revelation and considered valid.

That leaves us sixth revelation, and that's the Krama tradition, the tradition of the Kaulas. That's seen as the sixth Srotas. So that's why he says, "This *Tantrāloka* exudes all the flavors of Śaivism because it has absorbed those of the essences of all six streams of revelation, for all six are encompassed within these three and a half lineages." That at least is his assertion. He nowhere cites a, um, *Buddhatantra* or *Garuḍatantra* to my knowledge, um, although his commentator may, um — Jayaratha does it on one occasion, um. But this doesn't matter because, um, materials of that — of those two kinds — are found incorporated within, um, the body of Dakṣiṇasrotas literature, uh, which is more important in the immediate proximity — proximity of the Trika. So he could argue that it's all somehow subsumed within the textual corpus which he's dealing with, even though he doesn't place an exclusive emphasis on texts assigned to that Srotas. 

Um, so now let's consider Maheśvara. He's a shadowy figure, as it has been so far, um, who's not usually mentioned as one of, uh, Abhinavagupta's teachers. But nonetheless, it's — the information is here to be found in Jayaratha's commentary on the *Tantrāloka*. And he says Maheśvara is the person who — he has told us — was his guru, who he — Abhinavagupta — has told us in some lost work was his guru in the lineage — lineages plural — called Ārdhatriyambaka and Śrīśāntiti or Śrīnāthasāntati, under the names Parameśa and Īśa. 

So we're being asked to believe that one guru is referred to (for the convenience of meter) either as Maheśvara, Parameśvara, or Īśa. And this lost work of Abhinavagupta is cited by Jayaratha, and the verse may be translated as follows. You have it on page two, just before the middle.

> May this triple guru lineage fully nourish my understanding of the teachings of the Trika: (1) the glorious tradition of the Siddhas, from Bhaṭṭārikā (feminine) to my guru Bhūti (beginning with Bhaṭṭārikā and ending with Bhūti — Bhūtyantā; obviously he means his guru Bhūti because he's receiving this tradition); (2) the glorious tradition of the Śrīśāntana, from Bhaṭṭa to my guru Parameśa; and (3) the supreme guru lineage, from Bhaṭṭa to my guru Īśa.

The first of those three is the Krama tradition because only the Krama begins with a Bhaṭṭārikā, namely the goddess Maṅgalā or the Yoginī Maṅgalā, who's venerated as the source of this, uh, tradition of Kāli contemplation and Kāli worship. 

Uh, the other two are respectively the Śrīśāntāna and the Ārdhatriyambaka. Now that immediately, uh, collides with our information that is much more conspicuous in *Tantrāloka* that Abhinavagupta's primary teacher in the Kaula tradition was a — a guru called Śambhunātha, who's mentioned later on in this, uh — in these opening verses. But in my understanding of the situation, he's acknowledging in each of his works those gurus who are teaching him in relation to the work in question, which is generally exegetical. And Maheśvara's principal function is as his teacher in the system of the, uh, Trika, the Kaula system of the Trika taught in the *Parātriṃśikā* or *Triṃśikā*.

Um, there is more than one system floating around and interacting in Kashmir at this — at this time. And one of them is based upon the *Parātriṃśikā*. I've put the title up on previous occasions. And this system is often referred to — the work has been published under this title *Parātriṃśikā* in a commentary by Abhinavagupta, the *Parātriṃśikāvivaraṇa*, a wonderful, detailed, and difficult, extremely interesting, uh, commentary, uh — the *Parātriṃśikāvivaraṇa*. Abhinavagupta himself prefers to know it as the *Triśikā* *Tantra*. The *Tantra* of the — the goddess who presides over the three: Parā, Parāparā, and Aparā. 

So out of, um, consideration for Abhinavagupta's learning, I too will adopt this expression *Triśikā* in preference to *Triṃśikā* — *Triṃśikā*. 

So what I've done here on this second page of your handout is to bring together evidence which has been largely, I think completely, overlooked: that Maheśvara is indeed his guru in that tradition, in the exegesis of that particular *Tantra*. 

Um, so you have, I think, one, two, three passages which make this clear. In the first, he's referred to as Maheśvara; in the second as Paramaśvara; um, and in the third as Paramaśvara again. 

Um, so typically:

> It was the glorious God Śiva, who uses the hearts of human teachers to liberate all who have come to him for refuge, who as Paramaśvara established me in this all-encompassing reality. 

That's — I give you one example of that.

Now he also associates Maheśvara with the Śrīnāthasāntāna or Śrīśāntāna. And, um, the question of the identity of this is a, uh, a tricky one. But what we can see from the evidence presented to us in the *Tantrāloka* and indeed in the ritual manuals of the Kashmiris is that it is a Śākta tradition of the Kāula type. Because it features Macchanda among the gurus to be worshipped and Bhagadattanātha. And Bhagadatta is an extremely rare name. I think I have found only one occurrence of it, um, as a name rather than an epithet, um, in an early inscription from the 2nd century in Prakrit, um. It has a Vedic ring to it, Bhaga being an ancient Vedic deity. But Bhagadatta figures largely in Brahmanical knowledge as the — the king of Prāgjyotiṣa, of Assam — Kāmarūpa, though it's not called Kāmarūpa in the *Mahābhārata*; it's called Prāgjyotiṣa. 

So Bhagadatta is a kind of culture hero of Assam. The main lineages of the kings descend — claim descent from him, uh, over a period of 2 or 3,000 years. Although they can't give all the generations, of course, it — then a thousand years passed, and *then* came so-and-so. But anyway, they claimed descent from this mythical king who's a — a hero in the *Mahābhārata*. He's one of the many heroic, uh, opponents of Arjuna whom Arjuna kills through trickery. But he is a kind of noble warrior, um, noted for his great skill in, uh, riding and fighting on elephant back. Which is why Jayadeva, the, um — the author of the *Gītagovinda*, I think, uh, a huge anthology of medieval India — of medieval fine poetry, um — is also called Bhagadatta because his family — his lineage — are, uh, commanders of the elephant corps of the kings of that region. And so he's called Bhagadatta, not because the name was still in currency, but to honor him for his expertise as a master of elephant training and riding and fighting on elephant back. As you know, elephants are very important part of, uh, uh, military force or strength in medieval India.

Um, so anyway, it's a Śākta tradition. And you can see that at a glance if you look at the — the — the three *mantras* that are given there on page three, which are used in the, uh, initiation ceremony of this particular Santāna. You see, they consist essentially of feminine vocatives, indicating rather clearly that this is a Śākta-oriented tradition. And I'm going to leave it there. There's other — there's other evidence of the Kāula nature, uh, in the *mantras* themselves. Other *mantras* that are used when adoring the Nāthas of this tradition. Each *mantra* ends in Nāthapāda and begins with Hrīm Śrīm. This is formulaic for the Kāula, the early Kāula tradition. We find this in both the *Pūrvāmnāya* and in the *Uttarāmnāya*. *Mantras* are formed not with datives followed by Namaḥ, but simply by Nāthapāda — a vocative Nātha followed by the word Pāda — and preceding with Hrīm Śrīm, sometimes with other *mantras* introduced — seed syllables — but always with this Hrīm Śrīm element. It's a signature of Kāula revelation. 

Now this tradition seems to have, as it were, fallen through the floor. It's left no, um, works that we are aware of. But two of the three *mantras* lived on in the ritual practices of the Kashmirian priests. They're recited, um, before carrying the corpse of the deceased initiate to the cremation ground. So they — they have a niche in Kashmirian ritual tradition. They — they clung on, as it were. But the tradition itself is — there's no trace of it: no literature, no exegesis. 

But now I want to turn to something about which we can say a great deal more, and that is the guru Bhūtirāja and his connection with Abhinavagupta. Um, and my proposition here is that Bhūtirāja is a guru of the Krama and taught the Krama to Abhinavagupta and that Bhūtirāja was his principal [COMPLETED] Abhinavagupta in the early part of his, uh, career, uh, when — in my — according to my proposition — Abhinavagupta's focus was upon the esoteric Śaiva tradition of the Krama, not the Trika. Um, so let's look at this. He said, um, adoring Śrīkaṇṭha and his incarnations, Maheśvara and Bhūtirāja.

So the proof that he's actually, um, a guru of the Krama, uh, is fairly abundant, um, although easily overlooked because they're scattered, smaller remarks here and there in the literature, and one might overlook this literature in the light of the fact that Jayaratha, uh, for his own ideological reasons, wishes to dissociate Abhinavagupta from Bhūtirāja's teaching in this matter. Um, but that, I think, is his own axe — he's grinding his own axe there. Uh, and the evidence — the counter-evidence — is overwhelming. 

Um, *Tantrāloka*, for example, you yourself have stated that Bhūtirāja followed a different deity system in his Krama worship when you say, "And those descended from Bhūtirāja follow the understanding of the deity *Pañcaśāṭaka*." So even Jayaratha, uh, attests to this view although he attributes it to others. "Others say that you — even *you* say that," uh, and so forth. 

And then we have a passage in the *Mahārthamāñjarīparimala*, the Sanskrit auto-commentary on the *Prākṛtamahārthamāñjarī* from the early 14th century in Tamil Nadu, where our author tells us, "But a Śrī Bhūtirāja too has said, 'The *mantra* is the goddess herself since it holds everything within herself — itself.'" So there again we see a strong Śākta orientation. 

Um, and then in Abhinavagupta's *Tantrasāra* he writes, "*Yadāha śrībhūtirājagurravaḥ kṣepājñānāccā kālikālanābāśatatayā' ta iti*." Uh, "As the Venerable Guru Bhūtirāja has said, Kāli has this name — this name Kāli — because she projects, knows, and is subject to counting." Um, this is an artificial *nirvacana*, etymology from the root *kal*, the *karmadhēnu* root *kal*. And these are three of the meanings listed in the *dhātupāṭha* of the Pāṇinians — the list of meanings attached to verbal bases in the Pāṇinian system — *kālakṣepe*, *kālajñāne*, and *kālasaṃkhyāne*. Yeah. 

So all this points to his — his — his learning in that particular area. 

Um, and then in — in the *Tantrāloka*-*vivecana*, the commentary on the *Tantrāloka*. This is item five on page four. Jayaratha quotes a lost source on the guru lineages of the Krama that states that Bhūtirāja was the disciple of Cakrabāṇu and taught the Krama system to Abhinavagupta. So there's a clear testimony, not *from* Jayaratha, but cited *by* Jayaratha. 

And my item six is a, uh, a verse from the Old Kashmiri *mahānāya-prakāśa*, which was published in the Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies. Um, and I — I won't read it out, mainly because medieval Kashmiri pronunciation is probably even more difficult to get one's tongue around than *modern* Kashmiri pronunciation. Um, but I *can* give you the meaning of it. 

> "As the head of Śiva received the river Gaṅgā when it descended from the heavens on its way to earth as the terrestrial Gaṅgā, so Maṅgalā, the goddess — or Yoginī Maṅgalā — received the teachings of the Pīṭha Oḍḍiyāna. She was the source of the knowledge of the three successive gurus who formed the human phase of transmission, just as the kindling stick is the source of the three *śrauta* fires established for *śrauta* sacrifice. At the end of that phase came the venerable Bānu," (which is short for Cakrabāṇu), "guru of eight disciples. Just as Mahādēva causes his eight forms to emerge, or as Brahman manifests all the Prajāpatis, or as the rising sun illuminates the divisions of the sky, so Bānu caused the lotuses that were his eight disciples to open." 

Yeah. And, uh, the Sanskrit commentary on the first of these two verses, verse five, repeats the abbreviation "Pānu" that provides the missing names of the three human teachers.

Um, and I — here's my translation:

> "The Venerable Maṅgalā received the descent of the teachings of the Pīṭha just as the head of Śiva received the descent of the heavenly river Gaṅgā. She, comprising in herself alone the transmission phase of the *siddhas*, was the source, *araññe*, of the three-stage lineage, the specific *ovali*." (That's a Middle Indic word meaning lineage.) "'That constituted the human phase, namely Netra-ta," (which is short for Jñāna-netranātha), "Rājñī," (literally "the queen", which is the title of Keyūravati, the successor of, um, Jñāna-netranātha), "and Harasvanātha," (otherwise known as Vāmananātha, who was the guru of Cakrabānu). "Just — just like the kindling block that is the source of the three fires of Vedic ritual. After the series of human gurus, (those three), came the Venerable Bānu, the first of the series of disciples, the *śiṣyaogha*. He was the guru of eight disciples, among whom Rājñī Īśānikā was the source of the lineage that has come down to me." 

Now we — we know from Kashmiri language, the Kashmiri language as recorded in that wonderful dictionary, uh, of, uh — the Kashmiri language produced by Indian — by Kashmiri paṇḍits under the direction of, uh — uh — um — Grierson. Um, we know that the term *araññe* in — in Kashmiri is used for any Śākta female adept. They're called "queens." So this is why Īśānikā is termed "Rājñī" here. It just — it doesn't mean she was actually a prince — princess or queen. It just means that she was a Śākta adept. It's a title used by the Kashmiris for Śākta adepts. 

Um, we find the word used in one of the, uh — one of the poems of the female, uh, Kashmiri-an mystic Lallā-dēd. Um, at some point, a verse addresses a — a *śākta-kastrī*, uh, and with the term *araññe*. Uh, "*Kaba śāktikastrī* — take your wine and your cakes and worship the goddess." It's, um — I forget the exact wording now. But the — the word occurs in early Kashmiri-an sources.

Um, and the commentary on the second of these verses confirms that the Bānu of the first is indeed Cakrabāṇu. Um, it says, "In the same way, Bānu, the Venerable Cakrabāṇu, caused the lotuses that are the eight disciples to open."

Now, having established, I think, beyond doubt that Bhūtirāja was indeed Abhinavagupta's guru in the Krama, we now come to firm evidence that, um, Bhūtirāja was Abhinavagupta's guru at the time that he wrote the *Gītārthasaṅgraha*, his summary teaching or summary of the core teachings of the *Gītā*. The *Gītārthasaṅgraha* is not exactly a running commentary. Although it follows the order of the verses, it only picks out certain important passages and elaborates the meaning of those along Krama lines. And, um, the guru lineage is found there in that first verse that you have — number nine on page five. 

> "There was the illustrious Kacchāṇa, a grammarian who equalled Vāraruci himself, boldly self-assured in his brilliant learning. Adorned by birth in this *patra* line was the exceedingly learned and steadfast Śauśuka." (I would say that name is dubious. But the transmission, uh, gives that.) "He was followed by his exalted son, the Brahman Bhūtirāja, by whom all those who are sunk in darkness have been rescued, as by the sun, as by Cakrabāṇu." (Two meanings intended there.) "Abhinavagupta, a bee drinking the nectar from the lotuses that are his feet, has composed this summary of the teaching of the *Bhagavadgītā* at the urging of the virtuous Brahman Loṭaka."

Now, I propose that Abhinavagupta's *Gītārthasaṅgraha* is an early work by Abhinavagupta. It's not a work of his maturity. I won't say it's part of his juvenilia. I don't know whether he was — he wrote anything before he was, as it were, properly adult in his knowledge. Um, but it certainly, I think, belongs to the earliest phase of his, uh, production. When compared with works of his such as the *Triśikāvivāraṇa* and the *Tantrāloka*, this work stands out for its simple, elementary style; the absence of complex discussions of various es — of esoteric matters; the narrow range and number of its citations from or references to other works; and the uncharacteristic modesty of the author. 

By the time Abhinavagupta was writing the Abhinava — writing the *Tantrāloka*, he doesn't — he doesn't hide behind, uh, false modesty. He — he says, "*Bhairava*, I address you, for who else can understand this commentary on your nature?" I — I won't say he didn't tolerate fools, uh, uh, easily, but, um, he *does* say in *Tantrāloka* he doesn't *like* to have pupils, but they sort of put their foot in the door. And once one had gotten in, some others followed. And he actually enumerates them at the end of *Tantrāloka*. Um, Kṣemarāja, interestingly, is *not* among them. Maybe he came along a bit later, who knows? Or maybe he was just sitting at the back of the room claiming discipleship without actually being a disciple. Anyway, certainly *he* is a — a devout follower of the teachings of Abhinavagupta, whatever the reality of their connection.

Um, and this modesty, this *relative* modesty, is exemplified in this commentary on 4.24, where he speaks with some diffidence of his capacity to understand what he takes (following his teacher Bhūtirāja) to be the truth hidden in this text. He says, "This and the following verses have set forth the truth that is supremely secreted, *parama-rahasyam*. And although I am of limited intellect — " (that's *not* the mature Abhinavagupta) " — Although I am of limited intellect, I have explained the matter in accordance with my understanding and the instruction of my guru." That's to say, Bhūtirāja. 

That this is an early work is also, um, suggested by its doctrinal orientation because, although Abhinavagupta refers to the source of the inner teaching that he claims to be concealed within the *Gītā* simply as the *rahasya-śāstram*, the "secret doctrine," or *rahasya-sampradāya*, the "secret tradition," without any further identification, it is clear from his brief statements of what this doctrine conveys that he is referring *not* to the Trika or the *Pratyabhijñā* of the Triambaka lineage, but to the core teachings of the Krama — the tradition, that is, of his guru Bhūtirāja.

Thus, for example, the *Gītā* states: "*Devān bhāvayatānena te devā bhāvayantāntu vaḥ parasparaṃ bhāvayaṃtaḥ śreyaḥ paramavapsyatha*." "Cherish the gods with this sacrifice," or rather, "gratify the gods with this sacrifice. Let the gods gratify you in return. Gratifying each other, you will both attain the ultimate good." 

Now, that's a somewhat obscure verse, but Abhinavagupta takes it as a *rahasyaśāstra* and explains it as follows:

> The word *devāḥ* ("gods," "deities") in this verse means "those whose nature is to engage in joyful play" (*divyantīti hi devāḥ*) from the root *div*. It refers to the operations of the senses, the deities known as the *kāraṇeśvarīs* in the terminology of the *krama* — the goddesses, *īśvaryāḥ*, of the faculties, *kāraṇāḥ* — these being a well-known feature of the secret doctrine in the *rahasyaśāstra*. Saying "gratify — gratify them with this action," Krishna means that you should absorb the objects of the senses to the extent of your capacity. (Not *avoid* the objects of the senses, but *overload* yourself almost with the objects of the senses. Open the senses to the richness of the objects.) And when these goddesses (the senses) have been gratified in this manner, they will immediately gratify you in return as a result of a momentary liberation of the self in the form of its coming to rest within its own true nature alone. For their gratification is conducive to that immersion in one's own nature. If this mutual gratification — namely, gratification of the senses, and the latter's consequent gratification of consciousness through their coming into fusion with the inner self — is maintained in this manner constantly, in an uninterrupted series of moments of extraversion and introversion, it will not be long before you will attain the ultimate good: the absolute reality that is the state in which the difference between those two polarities, the extroverted and the introverted, melts away.

The centrality of the *krama* to Abhinavagupta's thinking when he wrote the *Gītārthasagraha* is clear from a remark in his commentary on the *Gītā*'s 11th chapter, the extraordinary chapter in which (at Arjuna's request) Krishna reveals his terrifying, all-containing, and all-devouring cosmic form, his *viśvarūpyaṁ* — his *viśvarūpa*-form. He tells us that the secret conveyed by this chapter is the highest of all spiritual practices, that of cosmic emanation and resorption, realized by devoting oneself to awareness of the ceaseless process in which, from moment to moment, one first grasps the object of awareness through the outward flow of the senses and then abandons it as awareness withdraws inwards. He does not say more about this *here*, he explains, because he has already given a substantial account of the matter in his *Devīstotravivr̥ti*, his commentary on the Hymn to the Goddess. 

Um — um — um. 

So, um, Abhinavagupta comments on this passage, um, where Arjuna declares (in the midst of his vision of the cosmic form) that Krishna is the eternal guardian of the *sātvata dharma*, which, of course, means the *sātvata* teaching of the *vaiṣṇavas*, the *sātvata vaiṣṇava* teaching. But Abhinavagupta has a completely different reading of that, a *krama* reading. 

So Abhinavagupta comments on this as follows in the next passage on page 7 in the translation, on page 8.

> The expression *sātvata dharmagoptā* in 11.18c means "one who guards the religion of the *sātvatas*". The *sātvatas*, in the inner meaning of that term, are those who embrace — embrace both *sat* and *tatvam*." (It's an artificial etymology, a semantic analysis.) "The former, *sat* ('that which is'), denotes the truth of the manifestation of differentiation both in action and in cognition. The latter, *tatvam*, is the non-dual reality that is the universal light of consciousness. This religion (which transcends all other paths to liberation) has as its sphere of operation both this emanation of plurality and its transcendence — *both*, not one at the expense of the other. This is because the true *sātvata* is one who is intent on perceiving the uninterrupted cycle of the grasping and abandoning of objects of awareness. The secret teaching that is conveyed in this chapter is the same as that which I have expounded at length in my *Devīstotravrivr̥ti*. So those with the intellect and oral guidance required to grasp it are invited to consult that source for themselves. What will be served by the *lokvācyatā* of explaining repeatedly what I have already stated in the clearest of terms?" 

So this is my proposition: the *Devīstotravrivr̥ti*, the commentary on the Hymn to the Goddess, to which Abhinavagupta is referring, is an alias of the *Kramakalikā* — *Kramakalikā*, literally the "Play of the *Krama*." Um, this is his — Abhinavagupta's — lost commentary on the *Kramastotra*. Not his *own* *Kramastotra*, another *Kramastotra*, which was the work of one of the early descendants of, um, Maṅgalā through Jñānanetra, namely Erakaṇṭha. He's the author of this *Kramastotra*. 

Ah, so this is actually a hymn to the *kālikā*s of the *krama*. For that can justly be described as his *Devīstotravrivr̥ti*. An alternative theory was put forward by K.C. Pandey, saying that it was the commentary on, um — it was the commentary on the, um, the *Durgāstotra* of Caitanya. But that is *not* a Tantric work. It's completely inappropriate. There are many other possible claimants to the side — to the status of being a "Hymn to the Goddess." Of course, why that one in particular? 

Um — um, for it — so my argument is that that work, his commentary on the *Kramastotra*, the lost *Kramakalikā*, can be justly described as his *Devīstotravrivr̥ti*, and it did indeed contain material of the kind specified, namely a reading of Krishna's revealing his cosmic form in the *Bhagavadgītā* as an initiation into the *krama*. The claim is that the — the revelation in the 11th book of the *Gītā* is, in fact, Arjuna's being initiated by Krishna into the *krama*. That's what is being claimed there. So at the very heart of *vaiṣṇavism* is the *krama*. 

(You doubt it?)

No, no, no. I guess there's room for other views of the matter. 

Um, yeah. So, um, there is indeed material of precisely this kind, material that would indeed have rendered it unnecessary for Abhinavagupta to repeat himself here in his account of the core teachings of that text. Of this *Kramastotra* and the *Kramakalikā* that explained it, no manuscripts, unfortunately, have as yet come to light. But in other sources we do have a number of verses quoted from the former, and some citations and paraphrases from the latter. And the content of one of these, given a prominent role in the *Mahārthamañjarīparimala* of, um — the *Mahārthamañjarīparimala*, a *krama* treatise composed by the South Indian guru Maheśvarānandanātha around the beginning of the 14th century, strongly supports this hypothesis: that the *Devīstotravrivr̥ti* is none other than the *Kramakalikā*. So I'm not just picking this out of the air. There is indeed, ah, a good reason for what I'm saying, I think. 

For in the last *prākrit* verse of the *Mahārthamañjarī* proper, the verse before the closing verse of obeisance, the author states the following. Um, he says — I translate here the *Mahārāṣṭrī prākrit* — "In this very *mahārtha* doctrine, that the God Krishna (manifesting himself with 16,000 *śakti*s) teaches to Arjuna, son of Pāṇḍu, at the — at the commencement of the war between the Pāṇḍavas and the Kauravas, um, so it is this very *mahārtha* doctrine that the God Krishna (manifesting himself with 16,000 *śakti*s) teaches to Arjuna, son of Pāṇḍu, at the commencement of the war between the Pāṇḍavas and the Kauravas, I pray for the welfare of all beings." That's the closing *maṅgala*. 

And at the end of his long Sanskrit commentary on this verse, Maheśvarānandanātha tells us that his source for this *krama*-based teaching of the *Gītā* is Abhinavagupta's *Kramakalikā*. He says, "*Etad vitattyāryavikhyātaikramakalikalokulāgame natā'bhinavaguptāryāḥ āryālo'citam ādarāt*." 

> "This has been considered at length and with great energy by the famous and revered Brahmin Abhinavaguptānātha in his *kaula* treatise *Kramakalikā*."

It appears that the *Kramakalikā* claimed that by revealing his awesome cosmic form to Arjuna, Krishna was entering a trance of immersion in the Goddess Kālasaṅkarṣiṇī in the core of his consciousness, thereby initiating Arjuna into the *krama* through a direct transmission of the kind taught in the *Trivandrumāhānayaprakāśa*, and in fact in other *krama* works. The *Kramakalikā*'s notion that Krishna's revelation of his terrifying omni-formity in chapter 11 of the *Bhagavadgītā* should be read as Krishna's initiating Arjuna into the *krama* is conveyed by Maheśvarānanda in the following passage, which no doubt paraphrases Abhinavagupta's otherwise lost account:

> "Subsequently, Mighty Krishna, foremost of heroes, feeling intense compassion for Arjuna, immersed himself in Kālasaṅkarṣiṇī, the power whose sole urge is to devour time, and (by means of a meditative union intensified by adopting the *kecarīmudrā*) penetrated and pervaded the flow of the transcendent *kaulā* ground, boldly taking hold of his inner power. While in that state, towering over Arjuna, he favored him with his supramundane gaze of unwavering brilliance, and thereby caused him to behold his own cosmic omni-formity." 

I propose then that Abhinavagupta is acknowledging Bhutiraja here as a teacher who had influenced him in a formative phase of his career, placing the *krama* at the center of his vision of Shaivism at a time before the Trika had come to dominate it. The fruits of this period, of which we know, were his *Kramakalikā*, or *Devīstotravrivr̥ti*, and (written later) his *krama*-based commentary on the *Gītā*. One other *krama* work by Abhinavagupta survives. This is his own *Kramastotra*, completed in AD 991. Perhaps thistoo was composed during this early period. But the only reasons in favor of this are that it too is a work on the *krama* (not a strong argument), and the fact that it is the earliest of his three dated works (which is a slightly stronger argument). 

Perhaps then, his monumental work on the Trika and his commentaries on the philosophical [COMPLETED] The mature works of Utpaladeva were all produced in the quarter of a century after these three Krama works had been written, his *Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vimarśinī* having been completed at the end of this period, in AD 1015. So, at this phase of his career, the hierarchy of revelation extends from the Vedas at the bottom, the most universal, up to the — to the Krama at the top. Um, the Trika is not there. And this agrees exactly with Kṣemarāja's view. Kṣemarāja takes the view that revelation is Vedādi-kramānta, beginning with the Vedas and ending with the Krama. 

Uh, actually, one of the passages is Devādi-kramānta, but I think we can amend that to Vedādi without too much, uh, uh, hesitation, since there is no scripture called "Deva." 

Um — um, so, in a sense, the position adopted by Abhinavagupta in *Tantāloka* is slightly out of the mainstream with this emphasis on the Trika at this period. Because his — his follower — his successor, if you like — Kṣemarāja — still adheres to this model, that the Krama is at the top. Abhinavagupta adopts a slightly different strategy: His Trika is — is itself internally layered. It has several layers. Uh, several levels, if you like. And at the heart of his Trika lies the Krama, but he still, as it were, projects it as the Trika, as opposed to the Krama. Nowhere does he say, "Revelation begins with the Vedas and ends with with, uh, the Krama." Um — um, so, uh, here we have the possibility. I think we have evidence of some progress in Abhinavagupta's career, which is often very difficult to — to achieve in Indology because we tend not to have sufficient data to see clearly how thought has developed. Although some progress has been made in the case of Kumārilabaṭṭa, for example, and Dharmakīrti. Uh, on the whole, we tend to see authors as monolithic, and it's very difficult to — to extract their intellectual, uh, development. 

So with that, I'll end. Thank you for your patience. [COMPLETED]
